Welcome minister.
Thank you. Um, thank you Brian.
Thank you very much for, um, joining us back.
Uh, this is a very short period of time.
Obviously we had the majority of the, uh, hearing into the,
um, public Service commission previously, uh, last year.
But we are very grateful, uh, to you for joining us
for this 15 minutes today because, and
because we do have such a short period of time, um,
if it's all right with you, we might just,
I think you just move into it.
I've got, I could, I could speak all day if you want me to,
but I'm happy to just go straight into questions. Well,
You're welcome back anytime if you do want to, uh, provide
The committee. Yeah, think, I think
we'll just go to, um, I mean,
yeah, so I think off you go
So much. I'll just start
if I can with the next question then I'll go
to, um, Francisco.
So at, at our previous hearing, we discussed the advertising
that the Public Service Commission did into the industrial
action that was undertaken.
We heard, um, at that time that there would be,
and it was publicly announced, uh, a review into
what had occurred.
And I wondered if you could give the committee some more
information about who's gonna be conducting the review,
whether it has, uh, in fact been started or completed, um,
and what the terms of reference for that,
uh, review will be.
I have to pass. Thank you.
Uh, the review is gonna be conducted by Jane Mes
that is commenced.
I don't have the terms of reference in front of me,
but I'm very happy to share those with the committee.
Uh, as I said when I appeared last time, it's important
that we review, uh, our approach
and our behaviors, given that we do set the standards
for the rest of the public sector.
It's a valuable learning for us, and I see it as that.
Thank you. And it, it'll be great.
I think, I'm sure we'd appreciate as much detail
and go into that review as, as you were able to provide, uh,
minister when, um, we last had the Public
Service Commission in front of us.
Uh, uh, so Brian indicated that there would be
probably an another type of campaign of this nature, uh,
ahead of the findings of you.
Are you comfortable with that position?
Yeah, well, I think it is important to remember
that we're talking about $426 32 cents that was spent.
Well, it's what it's, uh, spent
to ensure the public was given the full facts.
And it is important, particularly when people are wondering
and worrying about strikes
and various other things, what the facts are.
And I actually thought it was better value
for money than the $1,660
that the PC spent on social media in 2021
under the previous government were promoted the public
service census, which I thought was a complete waste
of time, given that public service census
was going to public servants.
And they shouldn't. Why, why, why did it need to go out
to the wider public This was happening.
Public service already knew that it was happening.
So, you know, I I just think it is important when you've got
misinformation being put out there
and one side of stories to actually put the facts out.
So, you know, one of the the things that came out of it is
that, and we can say that, is that today 80%
of secondary school teachers will
be earning at least a hundred thousand dollars a year.
I mean, that's a, it's a,
it's a great thing to be able to talk about.
So yeah, I thought it was probably
fine when you think in the scheme of it,
but look, we're gonna have a review
because you know, it's the right thing to do.
And as Brian says,
public service are the leaders of the public service.
So they need to set standards.
But I think we do need
to bear in mind it's $426 32 cents. Just, um,
Do, is yours up? No,
that's what we just come to you
A quick set.
Minister 420
$32 $26 32 cents, 26 30 2 cents.
How much is the review going to cost?
Are we wasting time
and money that could be spent on other things
for a 400 bill?
What do you think, Brian? The
Review will be significantly more than that cost,
but I do think it's important principle
around the sensitive issues and the use of social media.
So overall we will achieve value from it,
I'm sure standard. Sure.
Everyone agrees that we should be using public money, uh,
appropriately no matter the amount. Francisco,
Uh, Thank you minister.
And, um, I wanna start a new, uh, questioning line
and, uh, congratulate you on the work that you've been doing
around the, um,
sexual harassment standards that are being voted.
Thank you. Um, there's been a lot of work, um,
that you've initiated
and that the government has initiated around dealing
with harassment and bullying allegations and reporting.
Um, part of that I understand has been
reporting any investigations of anyone, um,
in leadership teams to the PSE, um, since the sort
of a JM giving incident, has there been any more instances
of people, uh,
senior leadership teams being reported, um, for harassment?
I'm not that I'm aware of. Have you had you?
No, not that we're aware of. But I thank you for that.
Um, well, your thank yous, frankly, um,
it's incredibly important.
I can't understand why anyone today would think that
that was acceptable behavior.
And so I'm really pleased
that we're taking a very strong line.
Yeah, I think the whole of parliament degree.
Yeah, absolutely. And I've got a sub on that.
Um, what are the new reporting processes
that have been put into place?
Is it, is the PC the lead agency, that's the body
that's been put in charge of keeping track
of all the reports and is the intention
to publish a dashboard
or something of, um, harassment incidents?
What's the, um, new updated reporting standards?
The primary accountability,
the chief executives say the way the system was set up,
they're responsible for their agencies,
but we monitor it closely.
Um, I'd be very open to a dashboard idea.
I think the more awareness we have it,
the better we'll get outcomes.
Ultimately, we would like to have a zero, right?
Yes, absolutely correct. But, um, I think
what we've seen on the mc skimming matter is
that there is no place for this behavior,
but also nobody should be looking to protect their friend
who's in that situation.
Thank you. Uh, I have a question around strategic, uh,
position of the Public Service Commission moving forward.
Uh, when this government first came in, there were cuts
to job roles throughout the public service.
And at the beginning of this year, we've had reports
that there would be additional, uh, cuts, uh,
to, uh, the public service.
And I just wondered, uh,
if you minister could confirm whether that was, uh,
something that the government, uh, was planning, uh,
to do following these, these reports.
I think it's important to remember
that we had a quite a massive increase in public service
membership, uh, during the six years
of the previous, uh, government.
Quite astonishing numbers really.
And, um, I've got a quite here for you. Thank you.
Uh, it went up by 26.9%.
It's been quite, uh, in the six years, it's, um,
had a small decrease.
I think we're down about, probably down to maybe a total of
what, which oh, we by 4.6% now.
So, I mean, you're still higher, way higher than, oh,
you're way higher than you in 2017.
So I think people need to keep, again, some perspective, um,
when the workforce has expanded that much,
you don't get there some, uh, reductions.
My view is it's all about getting the job done
as efficiently and effectively as possible.
And it's not a matter of cutting here.
It's about making better use of people that you've got and,
and considering are you, are we overdoing things?
Um, but, you know, look, I
I think it's very important that we understand you.
We have absolutely still got a public service
that's a lot larger
and the core bureaucracy as opposed to say nurses
and doctors and police and corrections officers.
And that is a lot larger than it was a few years ago.
So I expect that there will be some changes, but, um,
and that's going to be, some of
that's gonna be budget driven. It's just, that's
Way to confirm if it's gonna be
around the 5% reduction mark, well,
What are we looking at?
We don't actually have a target,
but we are just conscious it's public money.
We have to use it wisely
and we have to get the best value
for money, and we're not, yeah.
And we're also very aware,
and I think we're all very aware how hard it is
for people in the, um, public service if they feel
that there's some sort of, you know, target or something.
It's not that. It's the fact that we, we need to,
we certainly reduced the number of, you know, the amount
of money being spent on consultants I, and to try
and get those core competencies within the public service
as much as possible, rather than just fending it
out all the time to someone else.
So that's part of what we're doing.
Andy? Um, well, I, if I could have in two parts.
The first part of it is exactly that, which is the process
that you're gonna go through for it, sort of identifying
where there are activities
or the ways of doing things which are not as efficient
as they could be, and giving as good a value as possible
as they can be for the,
Um, well, every chief executive's going to have
to look at these areas.
So they're, as Brian sort of alluded to,
the chief executives are responsible for their own staffing.
And of course, one of the things that we have to deal with,
other budgets that people get,
but also the jobs that they're asked to do.
So in any business, any workplace people do need
to, I mean, the employers managers do need to look at
who is most appropriate for those roles
and how they can get their job done
as effectively efficient as possible.
'cause there's no, there's no great money pot out
there. It's all tax payer money.
No, I'm aware of that. Yeah. All tax per money.
So what I was trying to get at there is the assessment
of whether some of those jobs actually
worthwhile doing all. I
Think that's a, that's, everyone's gonna have to do that.
I, I'm very confident every chief executive thinks about
that issue all the time because good fiscal pressures good,
but you know, we've got, uh, we are looking
to adopt greater use of technology
that will have an impact on staff.
Okay. I think we can also add, sometimes it makes a lot
of sense for agencies that are very closely aligned to
decide to share back office functions.
If I give an example that was done some years ago,
and as the minister, I think works incredibly well,
and that's the security agencies, GCSB
and the SIS, their back office is the same.
It makes an entirely different situation in terms
of they know exactly where they are and,
and they work together much better than I think many, um,
you know, probably used to.
So I just think that there are some opportunities there.
And look, I can ask, the other question I have is,
there's a world of difference between a
bureaucrat and a public servant.
It's lots of magnificent public servants do wonderful job's.
The attitude of the culture of public service.
'cause sometimes you do get that, Hey, I'm, I'm,
I'm in charge and I can say no to something as opposed
to how can I help?
So how we, how we on that culture,
I think that's down to the chief executives, again,
they've got to set the standard of what they expect
and how they behave themselves.
So I think, you know,
they always say culture starts at the top.
Don't ask the person who's come in first, you know,
just into the job to start forming the culture of the, of,
of the organization.
And so that sort of can do attitude.
I'm here to help people to get the job done,
to help them in their, in their lives
or business or whatever.
That's the sort of attitude we want.
And, and I think, you know, part of what we're doing
with the public service, uh, reforms, the amendments
to the Public Service Act is to make sure
that there is no expectations that chief executives,
for instance, are simply rolled over for
yet another five year term
that there is in fact some contestability,
if that's appropriate.
And, and also to make sure that we are always looking
to say, is this the best person?
So I think, um,
and an attitude that there is, you know,
there's no free lunch here.
Everyone's gotta work hard. Yeah. Francisco,
Uh, thank you. I'm interested
in the strategic direction as well with, um,
the new, uh, so-called mega merger of M-C-E-R-T.
Um, are there any working estimates at this stage of the
expected level of FDS at the new mega ministry?
Um, we haven't got an exact number.
It, it actually isn't a mega merger.
It's about 1300 people's at the end.
It does involve a number of agencies,
but it is not significant in size,
but it will be very significant in terms
of its impact on the economy.
And, um, recruitment for the sea closed last week.
Um, are you confident that you'll be able to hire someone
before the estimated April start date of the new ministry?
Yes. So it's expected that the sea will start in April?
Yes. And, um, one final question
around the new mega ministry.
You said that the, um, roach at the, this
Is not a mega merger Ministry.
That's what, what they're calling
MB could be large merger.
Yeah. Which is, well no, it's a merger of small agencies.
The mid-size merger. Yeah. 1600
With the, uh, with the mid-sized merger.
Um, you, you said
that the impact on the economy would be, um, significant.
Can you elaborate on what you meant by that statement?
I think because there'll be greater coordination alignment
of, of the way a lot of the planning is done, a lot
of our environmental standards linked to a lot of things.
It makes a lot of organizational sense
and it has a strong support of all the agencies involved.
They believe it's the best outcome.
It was not an imposed transaction.
It was something that they wanted done for the benefit
of the constituencies they serve.
Right? So this, um, mid-sized merger was, uh, initiated,
um, based on the advice that the agency's involved.
We prompted them to think about it
because as each, we were in a situation
where we had a number of chief executive vacancies, and
before we went to here and recruited, uh, and Mr.
General Principal I've adopted, we need to think about
what is the best future form of the organization
and whether we can legitimately recruit.
Thank you. We are almost out of time.
Just see if, Tim, very quick question.
I was just gonna ask if there was an update on consultants
spending across the public service,
but latest coming down.
I don't. It continues To, I think everyone knows it's,
um, yeah, it's coming down.
I mean, I think it's really important to build competency
Within the public service to be frank.
We can agree on that. Thank you so much for coming. So good.
We could agree on some things. Yeah. Thank you.
And by the way, thank you very much for putting up
with me not being able to come here last year
to us somewhere.
We always appreciate it. I was somewhere overseas.
Thank you. Thanks to the team as well. Thanks. Nice day.
Yeah.
Committee for the annual Review of Fire
and Agency New Zealand.
We've got, uh, two hours to hear from you today.
So a reasonable amount of time to go through everything.
Uh, and I'll take questions from the committee,
but if you just wanted to, uh, I'll hand over to you
to maybe introduce the team
and make any opening comments
that you, uh, would like to make
Sure. And thank
you very much for having us here this morning
and inviting us in for our review.
Um, but Duke, before I was, uh, head
to some theater opening remarks, I'd just like
to acknowledge the, uh, tragic landslides, uh,
that we have seen recently at Papa Mo and Nui.
Um, these events are incredibly distressing, uh, for all
that are affected, including the families, the communities,
and for our people who are working in some pretty, uh,
extremely dangerous conditions.
And our thoughts are with those that have,
uh, that have been impacted.
The, uh, the Mount Moni response being led by civil defense,
uh, with foreign emergency, continuing
to work alongside police
and other agencies in the safety, uh, of responders
and public remains our first priority in this ever
moving, uh, situation.
And we have dear technical advice guiding when
and how our personnel can be safely operating on the site.
But I think more importantly, these,
these tragic events underscore why fire
and emergency is creating a future focused organization, uh,
that can react to these changing nature and expectations.
'cause severe weather events and land landslides are no
longer, uh, few and far between.
And, uh, we also would like
to acknowledge the professionalism, care
and, uh, discipline demonstrated by our people
and what is one of the most demanding operational
environments that they can face.
And also note that we've had some
of the committee members there, um, supporting as well and,
and really appreciate your
support in these challenging times.
So just, uh, uh, first off, before we kick, kick on.
So today I am, uh, joined by my chief executive, uh,
Kerry Gregory and National Commander
of Foreign Emergency New Zealand.
Then beside him we have our deputy, uh, national Commander
and Deputy Chief Executive for Operational Responses,
Megan Stiffer and who I leave from.
We have the Deputy Chief Executive of Corporate Services,
Darryl Purdy, here
to help answer all, all of your questions.
So in my opening remarks, I would like to, uh, focus on some
of the matters that were raised at the last committee,
and we can, uh, can address some of those
and then some of the progress
that we've made in certain areas this year as well.
So I'm pleased to advise that, uh,
foreign Emergency has now established all 16 local advisory
committees, which provides us our national coverage
and ensure communities across New Zealand are represented.
These committees provide reach into communities across
New Zealand who provide local insight to inform how we plan
and deliver our services across their.
I've recently met with all 16 chairs, uh,
and had the opportunity to share
with them the board's priorities for the next 12 months,
but also to hear directly from them about their first few
months in the roles and what
we could do better to help them.
This year. We've also approved our Comprehensive Asset
Management plans, which cover our fleet property,
ICT and equipment.
Uh, these plans are underpinned by data lead modeling
of our future focused operating capability with Borders.
Pleased to have these in place
and they now provide a clear, prioritized,
treasury compliant view of
where future capital investment will be directed
for fire and emergency.
Since our establishment, we've purchased 340 new trucks,
and we have a further 60 on order at the moment,
and we have approximately 76 million that's been budgeted
for fleet investment over the next three financial years.
Throughout the year two,
we have refreshed our performance measurement framework
to align with our new strategic direction.
This framework will be included within our statement
of intent for 2026 to 29,
and incorporates our outcome, impact,
and output measures as previously recommended
by Audit New Zealand, we have output classes as part
of developing the statement of intent.
And this work clearly links strategy, excuse me, outcomes,
performance, and cost.
So speaking about strategic direction
and organizational reform, um,
this committee had previously expressed interest in whether
fire and emergency operating model remains fit for purpose,
particularly given the increasing complex
and hazardous environments in which our people operate such
as Mount Moni, Papa Ma, and ua.
We must not forget. So in May last year,
we launched our new five year strategic direction, 2025
to 2030, which replaces the previous national strategy.
This focused strategies, uh,
is centered on five key delivery areas
and is supported by an implementation program designed
to direct our resources to
where they will have the greatest impact,
but also whilst ensuring efficiency and effectiveness.
A clear board priority
for the chief executives is showing now
that the organizational structure, uh, is aligned
to deliver against the strategy.
And underpinning all of that is our workplace place culture.
It remains a foundational element
and all 20 recommendations from our AWA hoe
report have been delivered.
But we continue to embed this work to ensure lasting
and meaningful change throughout the organization
and financial sustainability.
So long-term financial sustainability is central to foreign
and emergencies organizational reform.
And I acknowledge the significant interest, uh,
from this committee during recent appearances
by our minister, the Honorable Book Van Den,
and our monitoring agency, the Department
of Internal Affairs, like the rest of New Zealand Fire
and emergency faces, ongoing financial pressures
while operation operational demands
and risks continue to evolve.
This is evident in our responses to our major wildfires such
as those at Tongareero National Park and,
and in our Section 12 activities
during increasingly frequent extreme weather events.
As previously discussed, we are also working
to address the condition and age of our fleet
and buildings that we inherited at the formation
of FES in 2017.
And whilst there are substantial capital requirements,
we have been clear that these must be managed within
our existing funding envelope.
The board has been clear that foreign emergency must deliver
cost savings to manage known one and emerging risks.
This includes achieving the 60 million in savings
that our minister has asked us for
managing ongoing levy variability
and changes in levy behavior
and preparing, preparing for impacts
of the forthcoming part three levy changes.
As previously advised in 2023, uh,
the board established an externally chaired financial
sustainability and investment board subcommittee
with its role to drive efficiencies
and cost saving initiatives to ensure
that FE remains financially sustainable
and aligned with our new strategic direction.
To that end, I'm pleased to advise that across the 2026
through to the 29 financial years fire
and emergencies projected total cost reduction to allow
for the risk management and reinvestment is 150 million.
This is made up of the 60 million requested from our
minister to manage emerging risks,
30 million additional enduring savings requested
by the board, and 60 million directed by the board
for reinvestment back into the organization.
The net surpluses this cost saving program creates are
necessary because our depreciation alone is insufficient
to fund long-term asset investment
and lift the condition of our fleet
and property repay our crown funding loans,
maintain financial resilience
with our increasing volatile levy,
and to respond to priorities
and emerging priorities in New Zealand without compromising
the services that we offer.
So that's a brief, uh, summary of where we have been, uh,
since we saw you last,
and I now within your hands, full questions
with which I know those enough.
Thank you for those opening comments
and for the acknowledgement, um, of the, of those lost
during the recent weather events.
And just on behalf of the whole committee, thanks very much
for the Finn staff, appreciate, uh, that have been involved,
um, integrally involved in those.
'cause I know that's a really, really difficult,
um, area to work in.
So we work under that, um, that cloud, I suppose today.
Yeah. Um, but obviously some really important to,
to look at the operations of things as well.
So we'll start with some questions.
We, we do have a, because we have a relatively long period
time, we might do, um, up to kind of three questions per
per person, and then we'll, we'll move on.
But I'll control that. So we'll start with Tim Costley.
Thank you. Um, morning all.
I'd just like to ask for an update
and you mentioned briefly, um,
in your opening remarks about number of trucks
and new trucks coming online.
So just like an update really from
where we were when we last had this hearing in
December, 2024.
Um, the at, at the time,
and I'll just read you the discussion
so we know where we'll be starting.
So I asked, um, Mr. Gregory, of the 30, uh,
Manca chassis trucks, how many are now functional
and an operational use?
You said, I have to come back with the exact detail. Sorry.
I said, is it possible that zero would be the answer?
And you said, oh, now, oh no, it's definitely not zero.
It would be the majority now.
Oh, it would be the majority, yep.
And then you go on to say again, certainly it's not zero,
certainly it's the majority.
So what was the number of those 30 man cab chassis at
that time that were an operational service?
Yes. Um, thank you.
And, um, firstly, let me, um, apologize to the committee.
Um, the, I think, um, in that conversation, um,
I mistook the 47, um, man appliances
that had actually had issues with cracking
with the 30 chassis.
So my answer was in relation to the 47 rather than 30,
which we later tried to clarify
through our written responses back to the committee.
Um, so the answer to your question at
that time, the answer was zero.
Yeah. So it was just entirely wrong what you said.
It was the, it was a miscommunication
between my understanding of the question, um, in which set
of man appliances that it, that it, um, applied to here.
Um, even when I specifically asked about the 30
manca chassis, you mistook that as 47. Did
You, I mistook that as the group of, of, um, appliances.
Hence we'd had 47 appliances that had issues
with the cracking mm-hmm.
Um, of their bodies, um, through there.
And that's, that's what delayed, um, the 30, um,
man appliances to find a solution, um, to those
before we could go ahead with the build of those 30.
So that was the, that was where the confusion,
um, arose through there.
There was certainly no, no intent to mislead the committee.
Yeah. Wh which to be fair isn't
how it felt, I think, to some of us.
Mm. And I apologize for that.
Um, so of the zero as it was, where are you at now?
Uh, right now? Yes.
Um, so of those all 30 are, uh, in New Zealand, um,
and Megan, do you wanna give us an update on Sure.
Uh, so we have, uh, 14 that, uh, have been handed over
to operational response at this time.
And all of those are going through a training regime with,
uh, the stations that are accepting them.
So they'll come online gradually.
Um, we got them late December, uh, they're in the hands
of operations and it's new technology in the pumping system.
So we wanna make sure our people are up
to date on the technology.
Um, and they're with us right now,
So 17, uh, 1414.
And the balance, um, the balance, uh,
being accepted gradually, uh,
they're complex pieces of equipment.
So our fleet are making sure that they've checked, uh, all
of the functionality on those, um, pumpers to make sure, uh,
once we accept them, we're not, um, taking on any problems.
Okay. So when you, the corrected answer that said,
in fact, it was actually zero, not 30,
not the majority said all 30 are expected to be delivered
by 30 September, 2025.
So have they been delivered the other 16 are delivered
but not accepted
or not introduced into service with, with, so
Delivery is a term we use for having, um,
taken them on board as an organization.
They have to go through an acceptance process,
and then they get handed over to operations.
There's training and equipment fit out, um,
and then they become operational once they are actually
serving, uh, community in response.
So there's different terminology
as you work along the delivery line.
Sure. So they're all type three. They
Are. Um,
which is for the career firefighters?
Uh, yes. Typically, yeah.
In large built environments,
they are are suitable resource for
A number of, uh, volunteer brigades also have type three,
but predominantly all the career, um, um,
stations have type threes.
So we have in New Zealand a company that makes producers
type three trucks.
Mm-hmm. Correct? Mm-hmm.
Is there, is there, oh,
you, are they closing?
Sorry, we don't. Or we do. Yes,
We do. Yeah.
You said for now No, no, I said fitting out.
Oh, fitting out. Yeah. So are, are they,
are we producing those in New Zealand
or are they just not fit for purpose?
'cause I understand they might produce them for
countries overseas. Mm-hmm. Correct.
Yeah, we have, we have contracts within New Zealand,
and we have contracts internationally.
It's, um, you know, we have a robust procurement process
that we go through, um, in line
with the government procurement rules to, um,
assess the best for, for our different contracts.
So how, how do we sort of create opportunities
for New Zealand companies, New Zealand businesses,
to be part of that procurement?
Um, well, we're always looking within our procurement to,
to, you know, obviously encourage the, the, um, the,
the input from New Zealand manufacturers and, and builders.
But the, you know, um, there's clear guidelines for us
to follow around the procurement processes,
and we need to make sure that we are really robust in those,
those regards as well.
So is a fair and transparent process.
I think, uh, I've just visited a local, um, manufacturer,
uh, with regards to our large aerial fleet.
Uh, so I was able to go there,
have a look at their facilities here in Wellington.
Yeah. Um, so we, it's part of our considerations
through the procurement process,
but we also have to meet all the other
guidelines under procurement.
And what about while we're on the, on the track type five,
um, that's how we been an area of of interest,
particularly in, in Wellington.
Um, but, but I know in Auckland there's also been instances
of other, uh, types breaking down on the job.
I think back to the, was it the little wire fire we went
from Hamilton had to be deployed, so how are your type five
and even maybe type four if you wanna touch on it,
trucks, uh, um,
Progressing.
Yeah. But give us more than progressing. Yeah.
Sorry, I was just clarifying.
Yeah. Is that what you wanted? So,
Um, yeah, yeah. How we, how we doing
for numbers, availability on the
ground, both availability and reliability.
Sure. We've, uh,
got about $12 million worth in production
line you'd be familiar to take.
Uh, so we have three, uh,
type five medium being produced here in Wellington,
and we've got a, a type five heavy and a type six.
Now, they all have varying
capabilities, uh, but those two will
Be, it's like 47 versus 30 meters that come.
Yeah. And, and different, um, ability
to carry different amount of staff on them, uh,
different functionality.
I understand. Um, we have the he type five heavy
and the type six being built in Brisbane, um,
because they, they have the, um, the capacity to do that.
And then the three type five medium, uh,
being built here in Wellington.
And they're the, the appliances I went
and had a look at the other day. Yeah.
I think just for clarity of the committee, that, um, some
of our language being used in there, that,
that the type four, five
and six appliances are all aerial appliances
of different sizes different.
As I understand there's sort of two aerial,
or maybe it's two type five in Wellington that the,
you know, at best they're sort of getting one serviceable.
We've all heard the stories of Christine.
Um, so where are we at today?
I understand there's new ones coming, but where is it today?
What is the situation today
and what is the risk that sort of the operational risk of
if we can't, you know,
if we don't have the availability we need,
we have another tragic event like we've had in a highrise.
Um, how are we sitting today?
So, so today, I mean, we have our,
we have our aerial fleet that's operational.
Um, you know, it's, it's maintained to the highest standard
that we can, but it is getting, it is aging.
That's why we're replacing them.
So until we get our new capability in place, um, we're,
we are looking after the maintenance
of our current, um, fleet.
And you said we've got two in Wellington, you know,
it's also about, you know, the, a relief.
So when one goes off for servicing, we've got another one.
Um, but I would say, you know, the, the operational tactics
that are available for our firefighters at any given time
depend on a number of different contexts as to, you know,
if, if a truck was to break down, um, on route to,
to a incident, a firefighters are trained
to actually adapt their tactics to, to relate to that.
Um, if there's a second fire
and, you know, we, we, uh,
already deploying the aerial capability at one fire
and we needed another fire, again,
the tactics are deployed for that.
So, you know, we we're not always going to have, um,
you know, all of the different pieces of equipment.
Um, our firefighters are trained
to operate within the resources
that they have at any given time through there,
and they do that really effectively.
And, and just to finish, so just maybe give us one
example of those tactics.
So these are the, the aerial appliance that happens
to be serviceable that day.
The other one's maybe just getting serviced. Mm-hmm.
I'm not applying anything is on route
to something in a high rise, and it breaks down
what tactics are available to get up into a, a high rise?
Well, it's not so much to get up into,
'cause the aerial appliances,
and Megan can talk to the, the, um, you know, the use
of those aerial appliances.
Um, but, you know, they may be used for observation.
They may be used for water protection.
Um, our firefighters, um,
predominantly do internal firefighting.
So internal entry in through there.
Um, and the other means of exposure, protection can be done
through other means opposed to, um, aerial appliances.
Um, what it means is, is often the, the surveillance
or the eyes and ears that you can gain pain from an aerial
appliance or the high reach and can't be obtained.
So it is more around, you know,
are we more aggressive in our tactics
or are we more defensive
Satisfied to have the tools for the job today?
Yes. May I, um, I spent about a decade, um,
as the city firefighter in the city of Brisbane.
So a much higher built environment than
say, Wellington or Auckland.
Um, many of the tactics I used when I was in charge
of those large jobs was using the hundreds of thousands
of dollars of the building systems that we put in place,
you know, the stairwells that are pressurized,
making sure we've got clear, uh, egress, uh,
making sure we're evacing, uh,
orderly on floors above and below.
So, um, as a city firefighter, uh,
the building has a much better capability than any truck I
can deliver to a high rise.
Mm-hmm. So when you talk about confidence, our,
we've got professional firefighters working in these
environments, and I really trust their tactics
and their knowledge of building systems.
Uh, so I'm very confident that community members can egress
with good leadership at those jobs.
I, I think it's the, the,
the reason the question arises is it's,
I I absolutely hear you.
And, and you've got far more
experience than anyone around this table.
So I don't question that at all.
It is just that we hear from some professional firefighters
that, that are concerned about the availability of that sort
of type five, um, or aerial appliance.
And, and so I'm just trying to, I'm trying to wrestle with,
you know, I understand that, you know, you, you move
to the tactics, you fight the file in front
of you at the time, the building systems, everything
that's available, but they're also, um,
there's been quite clear messages sent to, to members
of this committee about the, um, uh, availability
and the impact of that availability.
So I just wanted to, you know, we
Definitely, those concerns
and the member raises a good point.
And I think, you know, the investment we're showing in,
in replacing, I've got some great working groups happening
with our frontline staff,
making sure we've got the right types of aerials
for our future strategy.
Um, and, you know, those delivery
of those five trucks will make
a big difference to our people.
I suppose just if I can just quickly set off,
um, Tim's line of questioning.
So your message to us,
'cause is that you have
professional firefighters have the equipment that they need
to, uh, attend emergency situations safely
And keep themselves Safe Yeah.
And keep themselves safe. 'cause the message
that we are hearing is from their opinion that,
that they don't have that.
Yeah. Um, I mean, our firefighters are very
passionate about what they do.
I mean, um, you know, I've been a firefighter themself 35
years and, and the, the type of people
who become firefighters just want to help people.
Mm-hmm. And they just want to, to reach into communities.
So, you know, obviously, um, they will always want the, the,
the, the top equipment, the best equipment
to do the best job that we can.
And that's something that really applaud, um, of our people.
Um, but the having the equipment at any given time,
um, you know, we, we can't afford as a country
or as an organization
to park in aerial appliances on every corner.
And I know we're not asking that.
Um, but it's to demonstrate the, you know,
depending on the situation is
what resources we'll have avail available at any given time.
Yeah. I mean, I suppose the message we hear from them,
and as it goes beyond just the aerial appliances
and it's the overall safety equipment,
but I'll move on to laga now,
but the, I suppose, is there work un undertaken
by f at the moment in order to bridge the gap
between your feeling of competence and the equipment
and the professional firefighters opinion that
what they have is currently not sufficient
to meet the needs of, of their job?
Yeah, I mean, I, I wouldn't shy away from it.
We've been very open, um, with the committee in the past
and, and publicly around the challenge we have with, um,
with our assets, um,
and the, the, um, the, I guess the, the large
historic underinvestment in, in all
of our asset classes across the organization.
Um, and, you know, as foreign emergency has come together,
um, you know, that's one of their big challenges of
how we address that assets.
Um, and that's why we've been working on our asset plans
for the last few years, which really inform our
investment decisions around assets.
And that shows us, you know, where we need
to put our investment over the next 10, 20 years
as we move through that.
But that's why we've been doing that work.
Did you have a sub, Andy, or,
Yeah, because, um, what I thought I might
as well pick up the, the PFU issues at the
moment, so sensible.
Yeah. It's just, so my, my understanding is
that the two biggest issues I've got are the equipment, um,
both the, the, the, um, uh, the trucks
and possibly some of the equipment that should, you know,
wear and use and all that sort of thing.
Um, so I, I am interested in what, what the differences
between you and them in terms of what's, um, you know, what,
what's causing the driving around saying striking
for a bit and strike another.
That's, that's, you know, so what's the
difference that's going on there?
And secondly, I understand the other bit is, is a staffing
or manning, uh, type issue.
So just can you just walk through what the areas
of dispute are and what the, um, you know,
how are you getting on with trying to resolve
Them?
Thank you. And, um, let me start off just by saying, um,
the, um, it's obvious
that we have some current disagreements, um,
with our unions, um,
and predominantly, you know, trying to settle the contract,
um, and some of the restructuring work
that we're doing at the moment.
Um, and it's, it's, I think it's a, a natural, um,
a natural tension that sits there
between unions and management.
Um, because the, um, you know, sometimes we're trying
to achieve different outcomes.
Um, if you look at our, you know, the restructuring
that we're doing at the moment, you know, um, we're trying
to build a, um, we're trying to build an organization that's
that's future focused and it can change
and be adaptable in the modern environment.
Um, the, the union's focus around protecting jobs.
So, you know, those two things,
although the, the, um, the, the, the outcome
or the purpose is the same,
they have different lenses that they look through.
Um, but it, I don't want the union noise
to distract from the, the good work that we do
with the unions as well.
And so, you know, if I take the, the work
that we've been doing around mental health with the,
the New Zealand Professional Firefighters Union
and our Tonga project, um, around, you know, looking at, at
what are the organizational stresses and, and,
and mental pressures on firefighters
and how we address some of those things,
we've been really working really well in that space.
If I look around safety, um,
and the work that we've been doing around our PPE, um,
and in particular in a design of our PPE with a, uh, uh,
PPE that's designed for the female fit that that's, um,
modern and, and more adaptable in that space.
So there's a lot of good work that goes on alongside the,
the natural tension,
especially while you're industrial bargaining.
Um, the, if we look at the, um, the, the main issues,
you know, we've, um, we've, we've been bargaining now
for about 18 months, um,
and the, um, over that period of time, um, we,
we really haven't been able to reach, uh, an agreement
with the New Zealand Professional Firefighters Union.
And that's why we've, we've sought, um, facilitation
to actually try and get some support for us to, to, um,
facilitate those conversations
and help move us forward as an organization.
And I think, um, all parties want to ensure
that we can bring this to an end and,
and find a, um, a sustainable and, um,
and respectful, um, settlement that we can,
that we can move it forward.
But Megan, do you wanna talk a little bit about the, um,
the, the pay and the Sure.
What's happening in, in bargaining?
Yeah. Look, uh, I think the 18 months is too long to,
for our workforce, they need stability
and to know how they're moving forward.
So, uh, prior to asking for facilitated bargaining, uh,
we put an offer to the union of, uh,
6.2% over a three year period now, um,
that would've taken the remuneration
of the average senior firefighter from around the 80,000
to 87,000 up
to 85, 90 2000 at the end of that period.
So we believed that on top of that, there's the capacity
to earn allowances
and overtime, which averages around 38,000 a year.
Um, so we believed it was a fair and reasonable offer.
Um, when you take into sustainability, um,
our recognition of the work
that our people do is reflected in over about a decade,
they've had a 37% increase in wages, um,
and a cumulative, um, percentage.
And then you compare that to the average, uh,
person in New Zealand, which is about a 10% increase.
So we do recognize the work that they do.
You know, the, the concern for me as the leader
of operations, um, is until we get settlement, we've got
a rolling one hour withdrawal
of labor happening every Friday.
The risk to community, I have been speaking about publicly,
uh, since that action.
Now, industrial action is an entitlement of the worker,
but the risk for community is so great.
Um, we have specialist skills sitting in that workforce
that can't be replaced, um, with another workforce.
So I, I've worked with the union productively over, I,
I asked three times to sit down
and work out what are the conditions where we could, um,
rely on that workforce during that hour.
A specialist skill required risk to life and property.
And we haven't been able to sit around a table.
Um, I've been refuted on those questions.
So to me is facilitated bargaining is how we move forward.
We give security to our community.
We give comfort to our, our,
our firefighters who are valued.
Uh, we need to break this deadlock of 18 months.
Um, and without that facilitated bargaining, um,
I can't see how we bring offers
that are three times a path closer together.
Yeah. Um, we'll go to la Um, thank you.
I have been waiting patiently
'cause I've got a number of questions
and I really appreciate the opening comments, um, with
around, um, the outlook
and also what you've got planned for looking 26 to 29.
My first question, um, to you, um, Gary, is in relation
to funding, um, in the levy mm-hmm.
Uh, with respect to, uh, you have commented media
that you can't keep doing everything for everybody, um,
which is not a bad thing.
Can you ex explain, uh, the rationale behind those comments?
Yeah, thank you. Well, I think, um,
all organizations have, um, funding constraints
and need to work within those funding constraints.
That, that, that, um, particularly, um, one
of the things we are seeing is, you know,
growing public expectations around the services that fire
and emergency, um, will deliver into communities.
Um, and, you know, from that, um, we need
to be very deliberate in the capabilities that we, we build
to ensure that our people are safe, the people we're working
with, the public is safe.
Um, and that, um, we can deliver that within our, um,
our, our funding mechanism
and our budget, you know, our, our primary responsibilities,
um, uh, around fire
and making sure that we can, we can, um, respond into fires
and, and provide a, use our service deal
with the hazardous substances.
So, um, what we can't do is let those core capabilities
and our expertise in those drop while we take on different
capabilities and build different capabilities, um,
that we can't afford as an organization
or, um, we can't deliver within the
funding envelope that we have.
Um, so it's, I I think the, the levy is designed to, um,
cover all of the activities across, um,
foreign emergency that we deliver.
Um, that's the, that's the purpose
of the levy that sits in there.
So we need to make prioritization decisions within
the con confines of the levy to decide
what are the capabilities that we invest in
and what are the capabilities that we don't invest in.
And they're tough, they're really tough decisions to make,
um, when you decide for an organization that we're not going
to deliver or build a different capability, um, which,
um, you know, can look like a gap in, in, in New Zealand's,
um, in New Zealand's landscape.
Um, so, you know, they're a decision we need
to take consciously
and deliberately, um, so that we don't stretch ourselves
so far that we can't actually deliver any of the things.
We don't want the organization to be a, um, a, a jack
of all trades and master of none.
I think the other consideration for us as well is, you know,
across our organization we've got 12,000 volunteers, um,
12,000 people that give up their time 24 hours a day,
365 days a week to respond for us.
So, um, you know, it's also what we're asking
of those volunteers.
So when we build up another capability
and we say, yes, foreign emergency will build up a
capability to deal with this new thing
that's evolved in there,
and we need to do that in a really deliberate way
and a deliberate way, talking with our volunteers to ensure
that we're, we are not putting more
and more draw on their time and their commitment
and their, their service back to New Zealand.
So, um, and that's what I mean by those comments around,
you know, being really defined.
And that's what we've done with our strategy.
You know, we've put our strategy in place
for the next five years, deliberately for five years.
So we can say, this is where the organization's gonna
focus for the next five years.
And we're building our performance measures around
that focus of, of the strategy in there to actually ensure
that we can measure ourselves as an organization
and make deliberate investment decisions.
Um, but it's about being really clear
around these are the things where we need
to focus our effort and our time
and our energy into, um, to, to give the best value
for money from the, the levy dollar that funds us.
Um, thank you, that's helpful to understand your thinking
and the intention and also, uh, the different
that you are having with the board
and then up to the operations.
Uh, would you, can you just talk about, uh, the water,
water emergencies, like grounding the, is that an example
of where you've gotta make those decisions based on what's
before you, because you've talked about the levy mm-hmm.
And it can only be spread so far. Yeah.
We just talk about the, um, grounding or power watercraft
and those types of emergencies.
Yeah. So, um, motor roads,
watercraft is a really good example.
And, you know, um, we were notified by, um, maritime, um,
new New Zealand that, um, we were non-compliant, um,
with some watercraft that we're operating, um,
under a couple of our volunteer brigades.
Um, and, um, that turned our, um,
our focus to those around, you know, um,
we don't have a capability for motorized watercraft.
And to build that capability is huge.
And when I say about a capability, it's not having a,
a jet ski or a boat, it's actually having training.
It's having the right equipment, making sure
that the equipment's safe and the PP is safe and,
and effective, making sure that the watercraft is compliant
and it applies
to all the different regulations that are put under there.
So to build that for as an organization for the country
is multimillions of dollars that, that would sit under that
to build that capability and maintain it.
And so, you know, it's not saying it's not a good thing,
but where does that sit in the community to actually, um,
to deliver and support?
So do you wanna talk about the
matter what you're hunting and Yeah.
The work you've been doing up there?
Uh, so when I first came to, uh, foreign emergency, uh,
this issue was on the table.
So I've been working with the, uh, volunteer brigades, uh,
with iwi representatives
and, uh, with local councils with regards to where
that capability best sits.
Um, my background in New South Wales is I led the, uh,
uplift of motorized watercraft for the state,
and that was a $300 million mm-hmm.
Um, program of work knowing, uh, the difficulty
of, and dangers of watercraft rescue.
Uh, so I, I'm well aware of the cost
of implementing a program.
Uh, the issue is, uh, things has
to operate within a legislative environment, uh,
when we respond.
And we clearly couldn't do that with the way this,
these legacy, um, capabilities had been inherited.
Um, there are other, um, ways that, uh,
those communities can be serviced
with this capability we supply
and we recognize, uh, a non waterized, uh,
motorized watercraft.
So we, we have, uh, capability for water rescue.
It's just not motorized.
And that's what we are trying to maintain,
that we can still respond to community,
but it's in a way that is safe not only for our people, uh,
but for the community as well.
I think over the, um, over the last week is a good example
of the deployment of those.
Yeah. So, uh, you know,
if you have a look at the weather events over the past week,
we actively deployed, uh, forward deployed, uh,
water rescue crews,
and they were, uh, located around, um, the areas of risk
that were defined through the Met Service.
Now, many of those activated during the night.
So our pre-deployment en ensured that there was a capability
to serve community, uh,
and there was over four, four rescues, um, using the,
the capability that we currently have.
So it's, it's a good capability.
We are there to serve community, uh, we just have
to make sure it's safe for not only our volunteers, um,
but for that we're assisting.
So, so I think that why
after that example is, you know, I think it's a good example
of a deliberate decision around the capability
that we can deploy
and what the, what the breadth of that capability is,
and having clear guide guide rails around that.
And, but just on the, the, um, the incidents
that you refer to there, um, you know,
when we first heard about that, we dug the data out
to have a look at the data around, you know, what sort
of responses had been applied there.
Um, since 2018, there were two rescues, um, um,
that were carried out, um, by those, there are other,
other calls and that, but two rescues over there.
So it gives you some context to the, to the, um,
the decision making and the scale and that,
but they are difficult decisions 'cause,
So just on that, um,
because you've outlined very clearly to the committee,
the decision making and how deliberate it has to be,
and how does the public get informed?
Because obviously when your firefighters
or your rescue teams or your first responders are
responding mm-hmm.
How does the public know that there's quite a limited
capability that is for whatever the incident is.
Mm-hmm. Uh, and so I'm looking for, it's helpful
for the select committee to understand those decisions,
deliberate decisions, and then you've got the funding,
but how does the public know that in terms of 1 1 1
or first responders?
Yeah. Um, it's, it's a really good question and,
and it's certainly a question we will have
to continually grapple with going forward as well.
I mean, the, um, the, the public to some degree
call 1 1 1, um,
and they have an expectation something will happen
and someone will do something.
So one of the hardest thing for our people is when they get
to a situation where they actually can't do
anything, it's really challenging.
I've been in that situation myself, um, where, you know,
arrive on the scene
because you've been responded to the scene
and it's actually, um, creating some harm
and order to the scene knowing that we haven't got the, um,
the capabilities or the right capabilities to do it
and calling on others, um, who can, and,
and sharing that responsibility.
Um, but when we, when we, how we communicate the, the, um,
to the, um, not just the communities,
but also to government, um, that's something
that we are looking at over the next few years of building,
you know, what's our, what's our capability framework
and scope and, and I guess limitations that sit in there.
Um, so that there's a clear understanding of
what our public offering is within the levy
and what the, what's outside that offering of,
of when we're, um, when it's too much.
And, and just quickly mm-hmm.
Is that message that is made from an executive, um,
decision board making operations mm-hmm.
Is that then translated to your local advisory committee?
Yeah, so I was just so that you around I'll tell,
can actually hook in
because public education is one-on-one,
basically does everything.
Yeah. However, you've, you've just seen it.
You've got limitations, the levy, uh, the design, uh,
what you can respond to.
And so what is helpful for public is black
and white, this is what we can do. Yeah.
And, and, and interestingly enough,
as though I spoke in my remarks about meeting the 16 chairs
recently, and we had this exact discussion, uh,
at that, at that forum.
So we have them there all day.
They have the opportunity to contribute
and we have a number of messages
that we need to, we need to get across.
And that is absolutely one of those forums.
And then even during, uh,
aside from when they're not just meeting with, with myself,
um, or the rest of the board, then the team within Fire
and Emergency that deal with the lacs also share
those similar messages through.
So it's absolutely a mechanism that we use.
Just say that. Start from Melissa. Yes, I have.
Uh, thank you Madam Chair.
I just wanna go back to the answer that you actually gave
in relation to when people call 1 1 1,
and you have to respond to when people call 1 1 1,
there's an option that people have
to yell out whether it's actually cruise fire
or, you know, um, an ambulance.
And I see that you responded
to 35,171 incidences that was false alarm.
What do you do with those people
who actually provide false alarm?
Do you find them? I mean, if it's a building,
often they are, you know, they have to pay for the call out.
So what happens if people actually call the fast service?
Yeah, thank you falsely. Um, firstly, I think the, um,
with the, the building with the false alarm, we don't charge
for those, um, false alarms anymore.
That changed in the legislation when fire
emergency came into effect.
Um, but there's also a number
of different reasons for the false alarms.
So, you know, some of the false alarms
that we attend are, are good intent.
Um, so, um, you know, people
with all good intent have called one by one
because they think there's a fire.
They might have thought they smelled smoke
or smoke from outside
of drifting into a building or whatever.
Um, you know, there's some that are accidental.
Um, might be somebody, um, cooking, cooking toast,
and set their alarm off and things. No. Okay.
There's, You know, um, a number
of them are defective apparatus, so some
of the fire systems fail.
Um, so I guess the point that I'm making through there is
that, um, there's many reasons that create the false alarm
where it's malicious.
Um, you know, it's, um,
and we've got the, um, we've got the information
to be actually do something about that.
Um, well then we will take action in, in those regards.
And, you know, we just, um, working with, with, um,
police down in Christchurch around, you know, a number of,
um, malicious activations around alarms, um,
and what can we can do in that space.
Um, but yeah, it's not a, it's not as simple
as a false alarm of 35,000.
That's 40% of your call outs.
Yes, it is nearly.
And you actually said that in certain situations, you,
Madam Chief, I, if I could just, uh,
you actually talked about
how when you go there often it's actually about
calming people down.
Mm-hmm. So do you think there should be a different system
in recognizing
what services are actually needed rather than just
a simple 1 1 1?
Um, I, I, I think in the case of, of, um, emergencies, um,
it's really important to get, um, you know, eyes
and ears on there straight away.
So the one one system works well in that regard
and being able to, um, going to the, the member's point
around, you know, the public just, um, want black and white.
Um, so I think the, the one-on-one system allows the triage
to happen at an organizational level rather than the public
trying to decide what the triage should be.
And, um, we don't know it's a,
a false alarm until we get there.
Um, you know, and we try to measure that
through the weighted response that we send to the different,
um, the different call types.
You know, we've got a whole, um, system that allows for
how many appliances go to what sort
of calls depending on the types of buildings and,
and the area where they are, all those sort of things
that sit behind it.
So that network works well.
Um, but like any system, you know, there's, there's pros
and cons and things that could be done better.
Yeah. Well just final, um, primary part from the long
and then we'll go to you, Andy, for your
Thank you. Um,
I wanted to reflect on the funding.
So it was explained that in your opening comments, um,
with regards to the 150 million savings,
uh, and then you, uh, discuss where that sits.
So I just want to, uh, referred to Kerry's comments earlier
that, um, the funding is, could be less reliable
and Vens has had to plan
for the possibility of funding going down.
Can you just unpack that more?
Yeah, sure. So in the remarks, it was, um, some
of the reasons for the need for us to,
to look at cost reduction of
that 150 million over the three years is the volatile nature
of our levy, um, that we've never seen like this before.
And, and I'll hand to Darryl shortly
and, uh, to Kerry just to explain that further,
but it is considerably volatile.
But it, and as with all organizations, if you see your, uh,
your income functional thing and you have to respond.
So that's where the, uh, the board has, has asked
for the savings to make sure that we can, um,
can still respond if it's being volatile.
Um, but in addition to that,
not only have we got volatile Levy, uh,
we've got potential changes coming up
with the part three, uh, coming forward.
We don't know what that's going to bring for us.
Um, and there are always new
and emerging risks that are,
that are popping up in our organization
that we have to be ready for.
So that is sort of the, the theory behind our, our approach
to find the 150 million.
But Carrie, do you wanna add some
Further detail in that space?
Yes. Uh, thanks Rebecca.
And yeah, that, I guess if I go to the breakdown
of the 150 million, um, you know, it's 50 million over,
over three years that, that we are looking for
to, to do those.
And it's really important the, I guess the,
the breakdown of that 50 million.
So 20 20 million of that, um, is
to go towards the minister's, um, savings
that she's asked for on that.
And those savings are too, so that we can, um, be prepared
for some of the, the, the cost pressures
or the, the, the risks that sit there, um, that we foresee
for foreign emergency going forward.
So, um, that's a deliberate 20 million
that's saved for those purposes.
On top of that, um, you know, the, the board has asked us
to find the savings so that we can, um,
reinvest into the organization
and the areas that we need to reinvest.
So, um, it's interesting, you know, unlike other, um, a lot
of other public entities,
our savings aren't going back into the consolidated funds,
our savings around risk management
and reinvestment back into the organization.
So it's making sure that the money is being prioritized into
the areas that we need to prioritize.
Um, but Darrell, do you wanna go into a little bit
of the detail around those savings in the
Sure. So, um,
in terms of the levy these's sort
of three things we're seeing at the moment, we are seeing
that the traditional growth of the levy,
which has been very reliable
for two decades, is, has changed.
So we we're seeing a lot lower growth rates in the levy,
and that's reflected the economic conditions in the country.
So that's the first thing. The second thing is
that we are seeing
what we think may be some structural
changes in the insurance market.
Mm. Historically
and globally insurance has been in less, in terms of supply
and demands, the price will go up
and the demand will remain the same.
We are starting to see, we think,
'cause we can see a national picture that that is changing,
that price of insurance is going up
and insurance includes fire levy
and demand is starting to change.
So people are not taking out insurance
because it's getting too expensive.
So we're starting to see that in the data we collect.
And the third thing is Kerry, um, mentioned in Rebecca
as well, there is a change coming in July, 2026 in the
levee, particularly in what we call the non-residential war
for probably easier to say, commercial levy.
The commercial heavy rate is dropping, uh, by 35%.
So, so 11.95 down to 7.76 cents
for every a hundred dollars insured.
And that's on the basis that there's an expectation that
'cause the valuation base
for commercial living under legislation is changing from
indemnity value, which is kind of like an accounting value
to some insured, which is the amount
of the insurance contract that the lift in
that valuation base will compensate
for the drop in the levy rate.
So they'll balance out the data on
that's available on the shift from indemnity value
to some insured is fairly limited and not help.
I find eventually there's help with insurance companies,
so there is some risk of
that balancing equalization won't occur
as we expect it will.
So those are the three things
that are really driving the risk around the Livy.
So as Rebecca pointed out, um, the board
and the board committee has been focused on ensuring
that we prepare for that
for whatever risks might have each way.
And so, uh, so that's the 150 million other three years,
which is designed to ensure the organization can continue
to operate, um,
and within its financial resources, uh,
as those changes take take place. Mm-hmm.
I mean, we, we are very conscious that, um, you know, the,
any demands on the levy, um, in, in,
in like looking
for rises than the levy is gonna put more pressure, um, on
that the, not only the cost of living,
but also on the insurance system,
and that we're seeing that through the insurance behavior I,
insurers behavior that, that, um, Darrell referred to there.
So, you know, it's, um, regardless of all of that, you know,
as an organization, we need to make sure
that we are being really effective
and efficient in the way
that we're spending those levy monies
because we're mindful of the pressure
that we're putting on that, that system. Mm-hmm.
Thank you. Um, and so you've talked about high level
and the volatility of the market
and obviously, uh, with the economy, cost of living
and all those different pressures.
So I wanna just go down the level just in terms
of the decision making that sits with the board
and then that sits with, um, executive operations.
Do you think, or can you foresee, will that be specifically
around some of the decisions of equipment staffing
and important things like training, uh,
bringing on new firefighters
and those that you are responding
and that you are being resilient to?
So yes, understand the insurance market
and the LE income coming in Yes.
Understand that there's savings,
the impact on the operations
and the decision making at an executive level.
Sure. So before I hit to carry in and,
and part of the, um, the reason for the board asking for
some of those savings to be during, when some
of those savings to be used to, uh,
reinvest back into the organization is
to focus on exactly those areas.
So training our people, um, how do we do
that more efficiently and, and effectively and,
and have enough, uh, firefighters
and not just trained operationally,
but in, in other skills as well.
So that, that is going to be refocused back into the year.
And then we've got, uh, other areas that are relatively new
to us from the, uh, legislation change in 30 17.
So our prevention function, um,
how can we be better in that space as well?
So some of those funds that we are asking the, um,
management team to reinvest back into the organization
are directly focused on that.
But then to the second part
of your question about the impact of us doing that,
what does that mean, uh, for our services?
So, which is, is also in the back
of our mind. I'll turn back to Kerry.
Yeah. And if, if I bring us back to, um, to the strategy
that we are developing there, you know,
it is about making sure that our focus
and efforts in the right place, you know, one
of those key things is a, is a, um, a,
a real focus on our prevention work to ensure that we're,
um, we're investing in there
to help keep the public safe, um, through those areas.
So, um, it's, it's not, it's not just about,
you know, how do we maintain what we've always done?
It's actually how do we build the organization
that's responsive and adaptable for the changing context
and environment we live in.
So, um, you know, it's, it's only eight years in, um, which
sounds like a long time,
but it isn't a long time when 40 organizations all come
together, um, to actually form a new organization.
Um, the, the, um, the, um,
a lot of the, of the resourcing across those, um,
40 different organizations was,
was just built organically from communities, um,
coming together and, and, and, um, providing a capability.
And then as legislation changed and,
and organizations came together, we have what we have today.
So eight years in, it's the right time
to look at our organization and say, are we fit for purpose?
Are we right sized? Where do we need to invest?
Where do we need to, um, devest in?
And, you know, how do we make sure that we are sustainable
as an organization going forward, um, so
that we can support, um, new Zealanders.
So that's what we are focused on.
We're focused on how do we build the, the organization
that New Zealand needs the future, rather than just
how do we maintain what we've got now.
And just on that, um, it's important, I'm sure,
when you're bringing in new firefighters
that you have those recruitment courses and training.
Mm-hmm. So from a written question, I got a reply
that January, 2026 recruitment course
or training courses been canceled, working together three,
um, courses throughout the year.
Will they be maintained or is there a threat
or a risk that they won't be due to funding availability?
Thank you. Do you wanna talk about him?
Sure. Uh, based on attrition, we need, um,
on our projections, we need two courses a year.
Uh, we always schedule four.
Um, so we've got flexibility, uh, to have,
if our attrition is higher, for example,
or we, we wanna put more resources in.
So, um, based on the attrition rate,
we can drop it off a course if required.
Uh, so we are currently, uh,
above our allocated FTE in across Auckland, Hamilton,
Christchurch, and, uh, Wellington.
Uh, so there was, so we're above our numbers.
Uh, so there was no need to, to add extras to those.
And so that course was, was not, uh, designed.
So we've got the following course full.
We are just firming up numbers for the September course.
Um, so based on the current nutrition rates,
we think two courses is probably what we'll need
to maintain our numbers.
My last question just very quickly.
So, um, how do you then choose, how does the future
then choose the location of those courses?
So if you've been, you can
find you'll only run two this year.
Mm-hmm. How are they selected? Mm-hmm.
Yeah, so all, all of our, um, training courses are run
through in the national training center down in ura.
Um, and the, so it doesn't matter
where you're being deployed to across the country, um,
they all come together to have a, a 12 week training course
that's carried out in ura.
Thank you. Just got a quick Suck from, uh,
Tim, and then we'll come to Yeah.
Just on the, um, training,
are they doing live fire training in,
Uh, we're currently, um, refurbing that facility.
Um, there was standards of, um,
we use hot fire, uh, smoke.
So we, we have to keep testing the facility
to make sure it meets all the standards of, um,
of safe work environment that needs some work.
We've gone to tender, um, that tender closed,
I think the 23rd of January.
Uh, so we're just sorting through the,
the procurement process and we'll see work starting on that.
Are are there other places in New Zealand
you can do live fire training?
Yeah, so the last course we actually did that part
of the training, uh, in Auckland, uh,
Air Airport Airport facilities.
So we, uh, moved the location for that section of the course
to us, um, the facilities in Auckland.
And, and, and so how accessible,
if you're a line frontline firefighter in Wellington,
how often are you getting live fire training?
Well, most of that facility is used for, um, the,
you know, the recruit courses.
Yes. Um, that was where we sent the, the firefighters on
that recruit course that, uh, graduated in December.
Um, they were the ones who went to Auckland. Mm-hmm.
But all of the, I think I understand
where your question's coming from.
Um, the answer to your question is
that all firefighters across New Zealand aren't routinely
having live fire training.
We don't have those facilities.
They're not across the country.
And, and it's part of the issue that it's been shut down
by regional councils that would, um, not let you use some
of the, uh, things
that are involved with that training in their region.
Or is, is that not an issue?
It's not something I'm aware
of is the reason for that. Yeah.
So, so what are, what are the barriers
to getting live fire training, uh, uh, around the country?
Um, well, I mean, we we're spread across 640 stations,
um, across the country.
Um, so like, say we've, we've, we build a capability in, in
and that allows us to, um, put through all
of our formal training courses through
that, that capability.
Um, but, you know, would
how many would you build across the country?
Where would you build them? What's the impact of that?
Of, of getting volunteers to them?
There's some big decisions in
how you would deploy live fire training
that sits in there. Yeah.
But, but it might be more than zero.
It could be more than zero. Um,
but right now we have, so, so is yeah.
Is our live training facility that's,
And that's the only one in the country.
Uh, we have another one down in Christchurch,
which isn't online yet.
Um, understand that's still got some, um, work being worked
through to get that live, but,
And what will the total period be
that Roo is out of action for please?
I would've to come back to it that how
Long has it been out of action? So,
Uh, so, uh, it was, uh, so the last course,
so it was the one that couldn't, uh, be trained in it.
So, um, could we get back to you?
'cause the tender document that we're currently, um,
reviewing will actually tell us the, the length of the work
Was just before the last recruits course.
Yeah. 'cause the airport, I appreciate you, you're making
what you can, the situation with the airport once,
but it's quite a different environment. Yeah.
Can I just talk about technical training for a moment?
Um, so life fire training is a really great facility for,
um, a fire that's in an enclosed environment.
Um, so you can understand
what happens when air is introduced, uh,
and you can react to your tactics.
There, there are many different types of fire techniques
that don't involve that type of training.
So when you look at the total training of the firefighter,
only one portion of their techniques is
taught in that environment.
So, uh, we have a balance of different, uh,
training facilities to achieve overall
firefighting capability.
Quick, um, training from Mike
Yeah. To
Ask most of them, but, so just confirm all new recruits
have been through life fire training, is that correct?
Yes. And so the, some have now gone through Auckland.
Is that the same standard of facility
or is it that what has been
You can achieve the same training outcomes with
that facility is probably the best way I could explain that.
So our, our trainers trained them in their facilities. Um,
Andy was gonna say you could do it with do with some
of the military as well, I would imagine.
Um, uh, first question I've got is, you've got, you did a,
an independent review, you talked about asset management,
you had an independent review done.
Uh, I'm not sure, we don't have any detail of
who did the independent review,
but it raised some questions about where you get to
towards the end of, I presume it's a five year period
or might be longer period of that
and the sustainability of the,
the investment level that's required.
Can you just, um, you know, expand on that a little bit?
Sure.
Yeah. Um, we can send you some more detail on that as well
around the different levels of investment.
Um, I think the, um, that independent review was
through, through Becca.
Okay. And then, um, vault did, did a review as well.
Vault Vault review. Yeah, yeah. Mm-hmm. Make sure
Was done.
Yeah. And so, um, you know, that,
that now gives us a real clear picture of, you know,
the life cycle and investment needed across, um,
all the different s classes.
'cause we have one for, um, our property, one for our fleet,
one for our, um, ICT and one for our equipment.
So they're the four different asset management
plans that we have across there.
Um, and the, um, it's, well,
that's informing our decision making around the investment
that we are planning in those going
year, on year, going forward.
So you confident in the advice we've got is that, um,
there are some challenges towards the, uh, the tail end of
that asset management plan.
Are you confident that you actually can go
Yep, we can manage those things.
Part of the reason that we've asked the board have asked
for those reinvestment savings and how we can
Prioritize. So that's
part of the 150 as able to go back,
Is looking at what we can do with it in the future
and be ready for some of those jobs.
So you, so you think you got that, that covered. Okay.
Second area question in terms of the finances is the,
um, is the levy.
And you said, well, you know, this, people are starting
to get some, you know, do I cannot pay my insurance
because they don't pay the insurance.
They, they don't pay the fire, fire levy. Yeah.
And we all know that, um, insurance costs across the board
have gone up enormously
and there's, there's a lot of pain in that.
So, um, the assumption that, you know,
everybody's gonna keep on being insured starts
getting challenged a little bit.
I just wondered if you've got a view,
and I've asked you this multiple occasions
before I look at the, um, uh, so I say first question.
So there's a vulnerability there, isn't it? Yes.
Volatile, you said you used the word volatile. Volatile.
So therefore there is a vulnerability to the,
the revenue stream that supports, uh, fence activities.
And that's why we have to be really
fiscally UD to be looking ahead.
So we are seeing it now,
but we can't predict into the future.
Right. But what we're seeing is volatility in Yeah.
I think Context of,
So, um, in terms of negative variances
to maybe budget in the last 24, 25 year,
there are more negative variances
to monthly budget than the last four years combined.
So that's given you a sense of the volatility's starting
to emerge in and the budget is set by economic model.
So even that's what the will look like across the year.
So, so, you know, it's not, it's based on a solid basis.
And so we're seeing some real volatility in the
last financial year.
I'll go to that. But where, where I do want to go,
and this is something that you've asked you before,
and you probably said it's a policy question,
but the, the call outs, um,
the various different sorts of call outs.
I mean the, the dealt with false alarms,
but the next biggest one's, medical agencies.
And, and I also think of the, you know, the,
the terrible situation, which you, you're dealing
with at the moment at Nui, that's kind of not a property,
it's not saving property either.
It's about saving and it's now sadly recovering. Mm-hmm.
Um, people, all of that kind of activity
at the moment is funded by property levies.
And then you say, well, property levies effectively
where they're starting to get volatile, the more
that we put on that, the more likelihood it is
that they're gonna become, become even more volatile.
Mm-hmm. So my question really is, and,
and I know that when you've looked at the, um,
when you've told us how much, how many hours
and how much cost there is allocated to things, the,
the cost for those medical emergencies relatively small,
but, um, all of the, essentially the, the readiness costs,
um, for the service seem
to be lumped into fire rather than to medical.
So I do, do wonder about that.
Is the funding model for, for purposes going forward?
Or should we be thinking about that as a policy issue
to just more failure reflect where the costs actually lie
and how many of those costs actually are not property costs,
but a cost that should be picked up in some other way
as we do for Yeah.
Other emergency services?
Yeah, but lemme say, I think, um, you know, firstly,
there's, there's pros
and cons to, to any funding mechanism, any funding system.
Um, so you know, there's gonna be, um, whatever it is, um,
there'll be upsides and downsides to that. I think there
No free large Success of, um, success
of governments have looked at our, our funding mechanism.
Um, and right now the, the decision has been that, you know,
the current funding system through the, the levy is, is, um,
the, the appetite of, of the government.
Um, I'm sure it'll be looked again in, in future times
around, um, that mechanism.
It's probably, it's probably not for us
to comment on whether or not it's the right model or not.
'cause like I say, there's pros and cons to each,
but, you know, we are really focused on, um, the, um,
the levy is designed to cover the activities, um, that are,
are performed by foreign emergency.
So within that, you know, we do have
to make those different difficult decisions
around what we prioritize.
Um, and you know, we've, you, you bring up the ev events
of the last week, um, you know, um, one of our primary
responsibilities under the levy, so not a secondary one,
but our primary one is user capability.
Um, and our usar troops have been, you know, um,
working hard in the, in the recovery piece
and on the, on the rescue piece, um, of, of
that particular incident.
Um, so, you know, that is a primary responsibility
that sits in there, but there's other aspects of it that,
that spread spread wider.
Um, but it's, it's a,
it is a policy decision, um, for government.
And like a, I go back to is, um,
successive governments have looked at
The system completely understand why
We've given advice and um, and, um,
and it is where it is today.
So the, the levy represents
what proportion of your income?
95%. 95? Mm-hmm. Yeah.
And realistically, what proportion of the cost that
I said realistically, not what you've necessarily allocated,
what proportion of the cost of operating the system
is related to property? Would you know that
Offhand? Girl,
I dunno that off.
Can I just make a comment? 'cause we'll probably have
to answer that separately,
but if you look at all of the disciplines
of our capabilities, they all intertwine.
So, for example, urban search
and rescue is, you know, they,
extreme talent is being shown on
that very sensitive site this week,
but those, uh, the capabilities they bring
to a building fire are also on show on a daily basis.
Mm-hmm. Uh, the medical capability we have, we can apply to,
um, incident, um, victims or even our own staff.
So sometimes the disciplines all blend together.
So I'm not sure it's as easy as unpacking them
as standalone pieces.
I guess the question is really is
that at the moment they're all left in one package.
Yeah. Correct. And they all go to property as opposed
to being That's right.
Saying, Hey, could it be an allocation? And
There is a, sorry, I said there, there is a cost to
building a capability as we spoke earlier
with the motorized Warcraft.
No. To build a capability that's safe, that's measured,
that ensures that, um, the equipment, the PPE,
the people are safe, um, comes with the cost. That's, it's,
And can I ask one other question, which is on, um, the,
the rural and wildfire area,
and I know that been, there have been some discussions in
the past, um, both forestry
and you, you mentioned the, um, the major fog was the,
and the Tora National Park.
Um, I think there's some observations about potentially
changing the way that you do business there,
and you just, um, again, unpick that
and what you mean by that.
Um, What, can you give a bit more context to you?
Um, I think you just, the observation,
um, considering new, uh, fence reports,
it does not have any key performance indicators
regarding managing un modifiers and forest
and rural landscape, but is considering new measures as part
of its strategic alignment program.
Okay. Right. Yep. Yeah.
Yep. So, um, just on, we've spoken to the committee, um,
previously on the work that we're doing
around our performance measures framework, um,
and, you know, understanding the, the outcomes
that we're trying to achieve.
So, you know, moving forward,
and you'll see coming through our SOI, um,
how we are reflecting the outcomes that we're trying
to achieve through our SPE, making sure
that we've got measures in place
that re reflect our performance in the wildfire mm-hmm.
Um, in the wildfire environment.
So quite now, um, our performance measures are a mix of,
of, I guess, um, outputs and, and impacts that sit in there.
Um, and, um, they, they don't necessarily
help inform us as to how we make our investment decisions
and, and ensuring that we get the best value for money.
So that's why we've gone down the track
of building a new performance, uh, measurement framework
that allows us to, to measure performance
of the organization, decide where we need to invest in,
and ensure that we're covering what we were designed to do
as an organization to measure our performance in both the,
the, the rural settings and the urban settings and the, um,
and the facets of what we deliver across the country.
So if I can ask just two, two final bits on that.
First one is at, at, at the high level. Yeah.
What is the intention?
Is the intention still to be, Hey,
we're gonna keep on fighting fires, then we're gonna try
and put fires out in these areas mm-hmm.
As opposed to sometimes going,
well leave those, let burn out.
Hopefully they don't cause too much more damage. Yeah.
Is, is that, so is that the intention?
And secondly, in terms of the, the levy that's imposed,
and I can't remember the detail of this.
So remind me the, uh, the levy
that's imposed on forestry owners mm-hmm.
How does, is is that a, does that fairly reflect the cost
that, you know, fence incurs in,
in managing those sort of fires? Mm.
A couple of big questions there.
Some of those fires are very big.
Some of those fires are very big ones.
Yeah.
Yeah. And, and, uh, as far as, you know, um,
as will we continue fighting, um, forest fires
or wildfires, um, the answer to that is yes.
Um, but every fire needs to be, be analyzed
and assessed in its own right.
So, you know, there's, there's times when our strategy
and a fire might be to let it burn, um, to reduce the,
reduce the risk from the fuel loading that's there, which,
um, if we don't, we come back in another week's time things.
But, you know, that's part of our necessity
to work really closely with, um, with community
and other agencies to actually understand, um,
what's the value, um, of those environments.
So, you know, from a, from a dock perspective, you know, um,
what's the, what's the value of what's being destroyed
by letting us burn that fire, you know,
from an iwi perspective, what's the tga, um,
that's irreplaceable in some
of those environments if we just let it burn?
So, um, you know,
each fire's tactics are determined on all of that information.
Collating all of that information,
the impact on communities, you know, the, um,
the at times we're seeing, you know, the evacuation
of communities to keep them safe from them.
Um, so that will be an ongoing evaluation.
As far as, um, as forestry, you know, we, we work really,
um, closely with forestry.
We've got, um, can't remember the exact number
of agreements now with different forest
companies across the country,
but we've got, you know, quite a number
of those agreements in place with them around
how we operate with them.
15, just 15, is it 15 service level agreements.
So 15 service level agreements with forestry around,
you know, how we work together in those environments.
Um, and just ensuring the, um, you know,
there's a seamless operation when we come in.
'cause they are large in their expensive operations,
you know, when there is a, a huge wildfire
and they're obviously top of the media, um,
because of the exposure
and the visual content that comes out of those fires.
Mm-hmm. So, you know, um, foreign emergency, again,
was designed to look after, you know, the risk
landscape across, um, you know,
not just the urban environment,
but the, the, um, the provincial
and the rural environments as well.
So, you know, we are designing the organization to be able
to respond to, to those different, uh, risk scapes.
And, and you are happy that the forestry owners,
and I should ask Doc as well mm-hmm.
Um, that they are contributing appropriately,
whether it's in terms of helping put fires out
or manage fires and or, and, and levy?
Well, they currently contribute
through the, through the levy system. Yeah.
Does dock as well? Dock
Dock, um, if a fire initiates
or starts on Dockland dock, the repay,
um, just on the forest share,
they don't currently pay any. That will do, they
Would July from July.
Okay. They'll do under the new Well, okay.
That case sos a follow up information on the scale, if
that would be useful to understand.
Would, thank
You. Yep. So the,
the, the,
the new levy comes into effect on the 1st of July, um,
and they'll be paying, um, yeah.
Levy as a part of the new
Levy. So currently not paying
It's reimbursement.
Yeah. Conservation's not for the others. Okay.
And the close working relationship in the last five
international deployments, uh, Canada
and to Australia, we send, uh, teams that are mixed
with dock forestry and fence, um, crews.
And that builds our capability in the country
collectively rather than as individual silos
To Oh, yep.
Thank you. Um, just interested in some
of the comments we've heard around
different responses to different areas.
So would it be fair to assume that depending on
where people are located
or where their stations are,
they would've different skills such as the
high urban environments mm-hmm.
Um, multi-story buildings versus the
forest fires, for example.
Mm-hmm. And so different stations would have different
training requirements or,
or sorry, would trained with different skill sets to meet
that, is that fair?
Yeah, I mean, again, I'll go back to, um, you know,
we had 40 different organizations coming together.
Some had really high skill sets in the, um, in,
in the rural, um, firefighting and wildfire fighting.
Some had really high skill sets in the urban firefighting.
Um, so we've still got a, a legacy of that.
What we're, what we're building
as an organization is a core base set of skills
and then specialization, which sits within that. Okay.
Uh, and I was really interested in your comment
for Megan about, um, non-motorized options
for, um, water responses.
Can you just give us some examples of that? Sure.
Uh, we've got different levels, um, with water rescue.
So you can have land base where we might throw, uh,
throw bags so people can hold onto something, capture them.
There's, uh, different techniques from
working from the land.
We also have paddled, uh, inflatables so then we can, um,
be more agile in what we navigate
and we're not, not limited to the motor,
so we can travel over shallower water, et cetera.
Um, so there's varying levels, um,
and all of them are based on the risk for that area.
So if you don't have very fast flowing water, um,
you might just have land based, then we have
that swift water capability, which is building on that.
So we have different levels.
And what's the definition of swift?
How swift does water have to be to be swift water?
There's a technical, um, definition.
And if I go back to my earlier days, I think it's around 12,
not, but, uh, that might be a question on notice.
On notice. I don't wanna show my,
uh, since I've been around.
But, uh, yeah. So it, you know, if you have a look at the,
the torrential rain we're seen over the week, you know,
200 mil overnight, uh, that creates, uh, a rapid
increase in height and speed, uh, through the environment.
And, and probably the most dangerous place for
that swift water to happen is
where it's a built environment.
So it's, it you don't see the natural
behavior of river systems.
Um, and that's where, you know,
that swift water excellence really comes to its full.
Yeah. Okay. So these teams are in water capability, um,
rather than a on the bank throw ropes, um,
which we have across our other, other,
uh, firefighters right
In on above.
Yeah, sure. Yeah.
So I'm interested then in the situation you touched on
before around hunt land awa here with a situation
where both volunteer brigades have had for several decades,
water response capabilities,
motorized water response capabilities,
they have had sign off for that from the CEO
of FE post merger.
They have compliance certificates from maritime
NZ to operate that.
They have a skip the courses for the personnel that operate,
that they operate under the moss.
Still the certificate of compliance for that.
So I'm interested in what has changed
since you've been on board that you now consider those
no longer compliant?
Um, could I clarify? It's not, since I've been on board,
it came about and I inherited the challenge.
So, um, sorry, how do
You mean? You've
been on board it, it was identified by fees
Before.
Those have been operating for several decades.
So have you've been on board since before that?
No, sorry. I came into the organization in
April last year, right.
Where the issue about fences itself not having the
authorizing environment to actually task crews
for rescue in motorized watercraft.
So we, vens has to have a certain
certificate under the maritime authority to actually task
and, and be the authorizing, um,
Which I've been doing that for 20 odd years.
So what's changed now that it's no longer considered?
Uh, the individual brigades had, um, a qualify, uh,
a certificate under Maritime fi.
Did not, so FI came about eight years ago.
Uh, and it was only when maritime brought
to our attention this issue,
which happened earlier last year, uh,
that we had to deal with that.
So we weren't an authorized, uh, rescue organization.
Um, and because it wasn't a recognized capability,
we weren't going down that path.
And because we weren't authorized, then we've got issues
around our, um, safe at work, uh, responsibilities
and PCBU responsibilities. Okay.
So the information I have says
that maritime means it is totally happy with
how professional they are
and the comp, the qualifications that they have
to operate those in vessels.
We've got correspondence that points out
where we weren't meeting our legislative requirements.
Right. And I think, uh, So this points out
that they are so clearly there's a difference
between those two bits of advice.
Well, I think from our time NZ
perspective, your interpretation of
It, I think with, um, all due respect the, um, you know,
the advice from maritime being happy with it, um,
the initial advice that we got from maritime,
there's been some work I understand by the local brigade,
um, or the, the people driving that work to,
to ensure they can get compliance.
But as an organization, um, I come back
to we don't have compliance.
Um, others may be happy.
Um, but I'm not happy as a, as the chief executive
of the organization, that we have the,
the necessary safeguards in place.
You know, we have no training programs in the organization
for motorized watercraft.
We have no assessment or measure of the PPE and and,
and the protective equipment
that we're using in those watercraft.
We have no assessment of the watercraft
that's been purchased through there.
Um, you know, being a SEA who has had two firefighters,
you know, um, asked in the line of duty, um,
I'm not prepared without all those safeguards in place
to be deploying our people.
And often things are fine until they're not.
Um, and as soon as they're not, um, the questions come
around, what have you done as an organization
to ensure that those people are safe?
We are lacking in that area at the moment.
Um, and therefore, you know, the decision has been made
that, um, if we are gonna build the capability, then we need
to build the capability properly.
And like I said earlier to, to the other member of the, um,
you know, we don't hold that capability as an organization.
We can't afford to build that capability across the country.
We're not just looking at one
Particular, right.
'cause as you've said, you have specialist skills,
everyone does the base training and you have
specialist skills for different areas.
Yeah. So it's clearly inappropriate
to have motorized vehicle
or water craft training in areas
where there's no significant river.
Yeah. But an area like the Waikato
where you have the larger, you have significant water use,
you have major events happening on
that at Waiwai, for example.
And to have no capability at all supporting that
to me seems a dereliction duty factor.
And I also don't accept that, you know, this is something
that's been in place or an issue for a long time.
Right? Mm-hmm. Your predecessor said it was fine. Mm-hmm.
You've had a different perception on that. Mm-hmm.
I accept that that's your view to make, um,
but my concern is that your focus is on health
and safety for friends,
people ticking a checkbox
rather than safety of the community.
Now, we had two examples late last year.
One was an overturned boat in the river.
No, no response, no police response
because obviously you've k zeroed the vessels.
So police are the responding asset.
They did not respond to that.
A second one had a person jumping off a pontoon
and a lake at Huntley broke their arm.
They were stuck on the pontoon in the middle of the water,
but was unable to be responded to support
that the helicopter rescue helicopter had to come.
Which seems like a totally overkill of resource for that,
which made, you know, fortunately was available.
But wouldn't always, it seems like this is a basic
capability that has been there
for many years operating safely.
And I accept your point that sure,
everything's fine until it's not.
But it has been fine for decades.
They have made a significant effort in
that I've low brigades.
And my concern is that you are, you know,
you say you don't have confidence in
the system that you have systems.
It also feels like you don't have confidence in
your brigade personnel.
No, that's, that's not at all the case.
I need to ensure that we've got the right equipment,
the right gear, and we've got the right systems
in place to support them.
Like I said, we've got very passionate people, um,
who just want to help communities.
Um, and going back through the, the data
and the statistics of how they've been responded since 2018,
two times, um,
that rescues have actually been done at times.
The other times are like helping police with the,
with recovery or people that they've lost in their, so
Sorry. Can you measure
the number of responses from all of your
trucks on the road by
how many people they've actually rescued?
Or do you measure them by the number
of times they've been called out range of incidences?
I think it's flippant to say only two rescues.
'cause that is not an accurate representation
of the job those vessels have done.
Yeah. There's no, there's no doubt that those, um,
those vessels add value into the community.
The question is whether the, um, it's foreign emergencies,
um, to allocate resource and,
and, um, financial impact into there to build
that capability or whether
that's somewhere else in the community.
And that's what we've been working with the,
the community there to find where it sits in the community.
I'm not saying no, we're just not doing it.
Megan's been up there, I've been up there talking to the,
to the mayors and their representatives up there to say,
how do we work together to find a way for,
for this capability
to be delivered safely within the community.
So you're saying that you may do that function,
you may offer that function again,
We've been working to see how that can be, um,
communicated in fence isn't building the capability
because we need to put our investment into our
primary responsibilities.
Okay. But in terms of this, as you've said,
you don't expect to have capabilities
across the entire country.
So why is it that you can't work with those brigades
that have been doing this for several decades
to gain confidence around the systems they've put 'em,
that would then align to give you confidence as PCBU
undertake that activity?
Was my concern is the local MP is
that you are putting a checklist ahead of the same
Document. Yeah, I, I,
it's, it's not a checklist.
Um, it's a responsibility of the organization.
Um, and you know, that's, uh, we, we take
that very seriously, the safety of our people.
'cause they work in such dangerous situations.
Um, I, I inforce
these are hard decisions to make around
where we build capability for New Zealand
and where we invest our, our dollars in our resourcing.
Um, but it's not a, it's not a one-off in, in, um,
Huntley and Nawa here.
You know, it's, there's lots of rivers across New Zealand.
Um, there's lots of people saying, here's a gap.
Um, why can't we f why can't we build this gap
and fill that capability?
And like Megan said, it's, it's millions of dollars to build
that capability for New Zealand, not
for any particular community.
Um, 'cause it sits outside our primary, um, mandate
to actually deliver that capability.
Yeah. So this is, we're not asking you to spend millions
of dollars, the community
fundraised for the boat themselves.
Mm-hmm. They've funded all their own training requirements.
They get donations to fund the fuel of it.
There's zero cost on fence to operate that,
and it has been operating safely for decades.
Mm-hmm. Why will you not let it continue?
We are looking for a way to work with communities so
that it can continue.
And we've been doing that proactively with, with the,
the councils, with iwi, with the brigade members themselves.
Um,
Could I, could I just step in here?
Yeah. Um, two things I'd just
like to bring to your attention.
I've worked in an organization
before where a child was lost during a water rescue.
The care around swift water
or water rescue is a community issue.
Not just carry worrying about our staff, the impacts
to community when you have the wrong equipment, lack
of training, and even the wrong, um, vehicles.
The motorized water craft that I have seen,
you would never build in a swift water
or water rescue program of work.
Now, I mentioned earlier I've worked with, um,
I've got an international recognition for this body
of work in swift water and water motorized watercraft.
You have to be very selective
on the equipment you're getting.
that it is consistently applied wherever that capability is.
This is more than Kerry ticking a box as our ce.
This is about what is the best outcome for community.
And I don't want our people sitting in a coronial
because they didn't have the right equipment.
We need to do this in a methodical, well thought out manner.
And it's not just two communities that we
represent every New Zealander
and what we offer to one community.
If the risk exists elsewhere, we have
to also offer it there.
So it must be looked at as a national capability, not a,
a local capability.
No, you must respond if you have the
capability in capacity.
We currently don't have a capability that is safe
for community members.
Well, that's your perspective. That's not per perspective.
And to your exact point, the risk is that we end up,
as has happened in the Waikato in the last few months,
public members taking their own
boats out to try and help people.
That is a much worse scenario.
They have no training in appropriate watercraft
and they are responding because you have stood down the
brigade that has experience in that.
Do you think that's acceptable?
Well, that's why we're working with the, the local council
and the iwi and, and the local community to find a way
that this can, that this can operate.
But we're not just saying no, not doing
and turning our backs.
We're actually proactively looking to see
how can we help this community, you know,
deliver a capability safely, um, under a different,
under a different umbrella.
Well, final question on this slide
Mate. Um, so in
terms of what happens,
what would happen if they did respond to vote,
what would happen to the chief fire officer if they went
against your orders and responded
the boat and saved someone's life?
What would be the consequence for that fire officer?
Um, we would deal with that.
Um, if that situation eventuated, I mean, it would,
it would certainly, um, depend, depend on,
on the whole circumstances that surrounds it.
But, you know, we certainly have an expectation that, um,
of, as one of our volunteer brigades, um,
and, you know,
carrying out under our umbrella are following our operating,
um, instructions and parameters out
The community. Thank you. Thank you.
Um, Mike, Thanks. Thanks for your time.
Um, just wanna have a look at, um,
I guess your capital investment moving forward
because you discussed in your,
in your report about $1.3 billion required more investment
required over the next, um, 10, 10 years.
And obviously you, you, you put across some savings
that you're gonna then reinvest.
Are your forecasting be often match, get to
that $1.3 billion worth of investment over
that 10 year period?
You wanna talk to that capital investment general?
Yeah. So at the moment this year
and the next five years is 750 million
of capital investment planned in terms
of our SDE commitments and our,
and our forward financial modeling.
And now we're working on the next 10 years, um, in terms
of being able to achieve that 1.3 so that
for the next this year
and the next 5, 7 50 quarter a
billion dollars to capital investment.
And how much pressure, I guess does
that then put onto your operational activities?
Does that mean you have
to actually create a lot more savings in that space?
Um, which obviously creates capacity
and capability issues at the same time?
So at the moment, the majority
of our savings activities are not directed towards
operational activities.
They're in the back office. So, uh,
and so the charge organization is
to balance our operating expenditure
with our cap expenditure
and make the two work in terms
of our fourth passive revenue.
And that's what we, we work on, uh,
constantly in the organization.
Yeah, so I just obviously heard
what Tim was talking about.
Um, and I assume that's due to a lack of, um, resourcing
and, and financial, um, finances.
So if you're having to invest listed in your, um,
capital investment, could you actually put more into your
operational expenditure?
Uh, doesn't quite work that way.
Um, and it's, it's not feasible either.
We have to invest in both of our capital and our operating.
We have to balance those and keep those
within our overall revenue.
And that's what we continue to work with board
and board subcommittees on, um, quarterly, quarter
by quarter to balance those two.
Yeah, yeah, no, I, I understand that,
but I guess what I'm looking at is like the residue in this
situation, I guess is through quite a lot
of underinvestment in the past.
Correct. So
therefore you're having to now invest a lot more probably
than you should have had to.
Um, and, and so therefore,
and that money's obviously coming out of the, the levies.
Um, and therefore if had been proper investment done in the
past, therefore you'll be able
to actually spend a lot more money in the operational part
of your, your, your role.
Um, and, and I guess when I, I look at some
of the other examples around New Zealand,
when you look at roading, right?
Roading is covered by levies, et cetera,
but the government chooses to actually put up what, 50
$50 billion worth of money into the roading,
into roading, great roads.
And like if we've got a hole now created by underinvestment,
uh, in the past, potentially a way to actually try
and help, um, fe is actually to look at something outside
of the levy to try and bring up to speed quicker.
Have you ever had those discussions, the minister around
I guess a bigger capital investment from the
government outside of the levy?
Yeah, I mean we, we, um, we've certainly had, um,
discussions around the, um, the capital investment
and the planning around that capital investment.
Um, one of the things is like, um, if we wanted
to buy a hundred fire trucks as an example, um,
you can't just go down to the, the local, um, shop
and buy a hundred fire trucks.
So, you know, there's a, there's quite a process.
It's about an 18 month process to go through, um,
to actually from design through to build of those.
Um, and we also, um, like I said, with with 40 organizations
to coming together, we also need to ensure
that we're right sized as an organization
and we've got the, the right
capabilities in the right places.
So that's, you know, a piece of work
that we are doing at the moment, looking at, you know, what
that model looks like so that we're, um,
we're not making regretful investment in there.
So it's, um, although any organization would love
to get a a, an influx of money to put into the,
the capital program, we also need to do
that alongside the work we're doing to say, um, you know,
what's the right investment for New Zealand across that.
So, because I, I look at like Hut City, right?
So Hut City, yeah. Fire station's been closed now
for quite a while.
Um, and because of that there's um,
roughly 9,800 properties outside
of the eight minute response mm-hmm.
Window, 16,200 people.
Like what is the plans for, for that fire station
to actually bring that back online?
So therefore hope these people
and properties aren't without outside of that,
that window. Mm-hmm.
Have you got that information at the moment or,
Uh, I dunno where it is in the asset management plan,
but we can bring that back
to the committee on the exact, um, timeline
Around.
Thanks. And so when we look at your frontline, um,
career firefighters I saw went up by 55.
And so is that meeting operational needs
at the current time?
For what, sorry? Or for, for your,
for your frontline firefighters.
Firefighters. And you had increased that by 55, so you're up
to just over 3000.
Mm-hmm. Is that meeting your operational needs at
the moment across the country?
Um, we weren't maintaining our response
yet across the country, so, you know, haven't got concerns
around our ability to respond to, to the calls that
We have. How much
overtime was paid last financial
year to come back.
And obviously there's a lot of volunteer fire filings.
Um, at what, what is the criteria from when you have, um,
I guess a station that goes from being volunteer to Korea?
Mm-hmm. You look at Roston which I think has 400
pullouts a year.
Mm-hmm. I think Queens town's got a volunteer unit.
Like when do you actually make that switch?
Yeah. Um, there's not like a number
that says when you do this many calls,
it changes from a career to volunteer.
It's about when it's too much the ask on the volunteer
brigades and when the volunteer
brigades can't cope with those.
So, you know, quite a, um, a number of our volunteers, um,
stations are quite large, um,
and communities have lots of people who want
to give their time back
and they, they operate, um, really well in that environment.
Um, whereas others, you know, um, demands
of the community are too much, much.
And so, you know, we look at stations like Lavin,
which we've just, um, put in place, um, uh,
a yellow watch in there, which is daytime career.
And, and, um, and the rest of the time it's volunteers.
So it's depends on the station
and the actual strength of the volunteers stations
to support that, that response,
rather than having a threshold of
that's now reached this number of calls.
The number of our volunteer stations do, um,
higher call rates than our career stations.
Yeah.
Oh yeah. They, they do amazing work, right? They do. Um,
It can be about risk as well.
So yeah, there's certain, um, capabilities
that sit within our career.
Firefighting, workforce areas, appliances,
advanced hazmat, um, rescue, advanced rescue.
So sometimes it's the risk has changed in that community,
so we need to bring a different workforce in.
Yeah. So I think it's a balance between activity capacity,
volunteers, and then what capability
And the response time, obviously is different
between career and volunteer
because they've gotta come into this.
Yeah. So you look at an area, um, say Queensland,
which is getting bigger and bigger.
Yeah. Like there must be point where do you go? Right.
We've gotta go, go to a yellow watch.
So, um, but I hear you forecasting, planning mm-hmm.
The advance and that's all part of your
Yeah. Yeah.
There's, there's a whole, um, body
of work being undertaken at the
moment, district by district.
So we've got 17 districts covering the nation, uh,
and we're about sitting down with, uh, all, all
of our frontline, um, leaders, talking about
where are the risks that are, that they think we are growing
to in the next period of time.
So we can plan ahead.
Um, that body of work will come together
and give us a really strong focus to, to make sure
that our asset management plans and our recruitment
and our model suits the risk coming
to us over a longer period of time.
So I think that piece of work will be a,
a really good check, um, point for this conversation.
And, and not, we all know the stories of the, the trust
that are break in down.
Do you have the data on
how many broken down over the last year?
We have. We
Collected some of, I'd haven't checked.
We, we asked, asked that, um, question in the house, so
provided an answer in, in that, but then
To correct it. Yeah.
Whether, whether or not we've got the absolute specific on
how many breakdowns.
'cause it, it comes down to what con
constitutes a breakdown.
Is that the inability to get to a call
or is that something goes, goes, um, wrong with it,
but we can still respond with it, so, okay.
Uh, la you to, um,
Just your primary after that.
Sure. Um, just in terms of the breakdowns,
so you will get the information
and that will be passed on to us,
or how will you report that back?
Yes, yes. We can provide that around the,
the breakdown. So we've had,
And can I just, um, ask just, um, on that, uh,
'cause I wanted to ask equipment around equipment,
what's the average age of fence vehicle fleet, uh,
and recommended in terms of the operational,
'cause you've talked about earlier mm-hmm.
Particularly around aerial trucks.
Uh, 4, 5, 6, sorry, I don't know the sort
of technical language, but, um, the breakdowns
that we've heard from messaging from our local firefighters
is a real concern when they cannot respond.
Um, but it'd be helpful to, for you to explain further.
Yeah, I mean, I, I, I think it's interesting to, um,
to understand too that, um, 69%
of our fleet is within its target life,
and the target life is 20, 20, 25 years.
Um, so, you know, we have, like we said earlier,
we have inherited a large underinvestment in, in,
across all of our asset classes.
And that's what we're working our way through in that.
Um, so certainly, um, 31% is outside of its expected,
um, life, um, or target life for us.
Um, the, um, over the period of foreign emergency, we've,
we've, um, invested another 300
and nearly 340, um, different appliances,
um, in, into the, into the mix.
And we've got another 60 that are on order, including our,
um, you know, our,
our five aerial appliances that are being ordered.
So, you know, we've, we're, we're addressing the issue going
through, but as you have an aging fleet, you know,
we are gonna have, um, breakdowns over there.
And that's the importance of having our maintenance
contracts across the country to make sure that the fleet
that we have, as we, as our, we work our way into a,
a more contemporary fleet, um, uh, maintained as well
as they can be to, to keep them,
um, reliable and on the truck.
But we also don't send one appliance to a call now.
We, we have a network of stations that we rely on so that,
you know, if, um, you know, one of our older trucks, um, was
to break down and then there's another truck
that's on the way, um, to support that truck anyway.
Um, and the, the way
that we have been deploying our trucks is we cascade the
model, so our newest trucks go into our busiest stations,
therefore trying to protect the life of those,
those trucks while we work through the, um, through the gap,
um, by ensuring that our oldest trucks are at the,
the lesser busy stations that run through there.
But that's sort of the model that we run through there
to look after our, our fleet.
Can I understand to that as well?
I mean, there's are clearly questions
that the board asks the same.
I mean, we hear the same things
and we see the same concerns around breakdowns.
Um, so we, we have a, a track, um, a piece
of maintenance spend on our trucks each year
so we can see what's happening with the, the spend
that we are, uh, spending on our trucks.
And that hasn't considerably changed in the last, um,
12 to 24 months.
So that, that's something that we would monitor.
Um, and of, and clearly we are wanting to understand too,
uh, any areas where we won't have, um,
or don't have anything that we can deploy
and we've taken from somewhere,
somewhere else within those areas.
So we are asking the same questions for the same reasons.
Um, and whilst we have an aging fleet, um,
we are doing our best to, to bring in the new ones, uh, and,
and try and bring the edge of that fleet down,
which you get the data for, remember that.
Mm-hmm. The age of the fleet.
Um, it's about, I mean,
it varies across the different types.
19, but it's about 18 to 19 years. 18 average age. Yeah.
And the, um, you know, replacement life is 25
or 20 depending on the type.
So type three or four or 20, the rest of 25.
I think it's important to, um, make sure the, the data
that we supp supply, you know,
mechanical breakdown versus a high pressure hose split, uh,
they're complex pieces of equipment
and, you know, age of a, a vehicle, you know,
a hose split could happen at a six month point.
So we'll try and get that breakdown so you can see severity.
So what is a contemporary flick?
What, what is that, that sort of,
because you've mentioned it, um, in, I don't know,
mechanics, but what actually is that,
and what's the purpose of having,
is that sort of mini ground?
Yeah. Well, I think, um, you know, it's,
it's noticeable in the new appliances that have, um,
just come on board now, you know, the, the new technology
that's in those appliances that firefighters can rely on,
um, you know, the, the, the drivability of those appliances,
you know, modern vehicles are easier to drive
and easier to maneuver.
So there's a lot of, um, you know, um, elements
that are designed into the new appliances that really, um,
step it forward for firefighters to make it easy
for them to operate out of.
Um, In our hearing, um, last year, uh,
there was mention of the 30 man
caps, I don't know what that is.
Um, that would be in series by the end of the first quarter,
2026 or this first quarter of the period that we're in.
Is that, uh, still on track for that?
So, so you've just explained the content ally, um,
and also you've also given us technical details
about an aging.
Mm-hmm. Um, my question is around when you are doing sort
of a changeover of different, uh, engines
or different fire trucks Yeah.
Is it always at capacity?
So when you've got sort of right throughout,
and you've also talked about the newer fire engines that go
to where the, it's business stations.
Mm. How is all that managed and is it still on track,
Angela? Yeah, sure.
Um, so I think, uh, the MAN it's,
it's a brand, the man trucks, uh, the next batch of, uh,
type threes that we're getting a of a Scania brand.
So it depends on our procurement.
Uh, we work with, uh, frontline and fleet together.
So, uh, my branch works with the assets branch to make sure
that we are building fit for purpose fire trucks
that address our operational needs.
So we've gotta, we lean in with our frontline firefighters.
Um, when you talk about a contemporary firetruck, you know,
are they water efficient?
Are they better systems? So we're not impacting the
environment as much
because we're, you know, a lot of activity, uh,
around engines, diesel engines.
Uh, so all of that's taken into consideration.
Our asset management plans also look at smoothing
out our procurement.
So we don't have large peaks
and valleys in our investment plan.
So we can plan better consistently across the years.
Um, firefighters are really passionate,
and when we're on the trucks, you know, we joke being nerds
because we're always looking at the latest, uh, technology
that we can do our jobs better.
So, um, our frontline staff wanna be involved, um,
and volunteers wanna be involved to make sure
that their equipment gives 'em the best chance
of impacting community safety.
So we work together, um, we have
to inform our asset people on the needs of operations
in order to make sure we get the best fit.
Um, thank you. So just noting, um, I've gone on
to your people profile
and just noting that professional firefighters about,
around about over 2000, 2,300
and your volunteer basis, over 11,000.
Do you see, in terms of the fiscal constraints
that you've got now, how will you cope with sort
of bringing in both professional firefighters,
new batch versus volunteer firefighters, new batch?
How will that sort of even out?
Yeah, I, I mean, um,
there's not a competition between the two.
It's, um, we look at it as our network across New Zealand
and how we sustain our network of both volunteerism and,
and career firefighters across there.
Um, it's, it's interesting from the volunteer lens,
you know, um, some communities, um, find it harder
to recruit than others, um, through there.
So we, we tend to focus our recruitment at a very, um,
bespoke level or of a community level for recruitment to,
to try and attract volunteers.
So we'll run initiatives directly in those communities
to attract people in for their, um,
but the, the, um, the, the balance of resourcing, of,
of recruitment courses that we run,
whether they be volunteer courses or, or
or career courses, um, are set by the demand for
how many people we need coming through.
So there's not a competition that sits between those at all.
So I've read in the report also that's been presented
to the commiss around the vetting of criminal convictions.
Mm-hmm. What is that program?
And can you talk us through that program
where you're bringing in new people
and is the existing, whether they're a professional
or a volunteer, is that sort of an ongoing sort of for
or to make different decisions around operations?
Yes. Yes. So, um, so we've all,
we've always on entry into the organization for VEing
of the people, um, come through, um, to ensure that, um,
you know, the, you know, we know who's coming into the
organization, whether it be from a volunteer
side or from a career side.
So that happens prior to the recruitment courses.
And we've expanded that, um, recently, um, into, you know,
um, the, when people, uh, um,
promoted into, into different roles.
So when they change those roles, um,
they go through a vetting process.
Um, and so, you know, just ensuring that, um, that,
you know, alongside our policies of, of disclosure of those,
um, of any convictions
and things, um, that we have other processes support those.
Um, I still have some questions.
Uh, and I think, Megan, you spoke about the, um,
collective bargaining
and now, um, you're given them for a period of time, um,
I think you said 18 months,
and you, you talked about the levels that have been offered
and, and the capability features
that have taken into account.
Can I ask, um, where things are at at this time?
And also, um, how open, uh, the
has been to the marketing engagements?
'cause we've had a lot of feedback,
or different members have had a lot
of feedback from members on the ground through a lot
of issues that are being raised in that process talk.
Yeah. So we're, uh, currently in,
in facilitated bargaining, which we, uh, sought
because we, we felt with, uh, a three times gap
between the office and, and the requests.
We needed a third party to help us navigate that
'cause we couldn't get any closer.
Um, so we've had two sessions of facilitated bargaining.
Um, the, the last sessions were, um, Monday
and Tuesday of this week.
Uh, we are keen to, um, work
with the N-Z-P-F-U on what their, um, return,
uh, request is.
Or so we've paid something prior to bargaining.
We're just waiting to, uh, cost out the latest request.
Um, the process from here will be,
uh, to cost to come back
and see if it's feasible within our, our offer envelope.
Um, and I think, you know, the only time, um,
we didn't attend bargaining is we were in good faith
bargaining when, uh, an industrial, uh, full withdrawal
of labor was tabled.
And we felt, um, we couldn't negotiate, um,
in good faith until we, we understood what those, uh,
actions were for.
But we've, we've attended everything except for one session.
Yeah. I'm, I'm in no doubt of the, um, the, the,
the anguish and the, um, unrest
that causes across the organization
by not having settled collective contracts, you know?
And, um, and, you know, I've made it, um, very clear to,
to our bargaining team around the need to be, um, proactive
and leaning in to ensure that we can, you know, um,
find a way to, to have a settlement, um, through there.
Um, 'cause I hear it when I go around the country
and talking to firefighters around, you know,
we just need to settle this boss.
We just need to, to, um, be able to move forward in there.
So it is causing, you know, um, anguish
and I, I know firefighters on the ground really struggle
with, you know, um, the, the, um, taking industrial action,
um, when it goes against, you know, uh, the,
the every bone in their body of what they do.
So they just want a settlement through that as well.
So, you know, we are working as hard as we can, um,
with the union to try and find, um, a settlement.
But at the moment, we are still quite, um,
quite a long way apart to actually be able to, to come
to a sustainable, um, resolution in that area.
And we'll keep working proactively.
That's why we wanted urgent facilitation.
'cause we actually understand, you know, the impact
that it's having on our people.
Um, and we understand that
after 18 months, it's, you know,
it's unlikely we're gonna settle that by ourselves.
We need some help in that space to have somebody to come in
and intervene to, to, um, to,
to help us move forward in there.
So we're very committed to, to finding a way forward.
Um, but it needs to be in a,
in a sustainable manner that, that we can
Have. Final question,
my last question is, um, according
to section 13, uh, fees act operating principles of fees,
can you comment, are you abiding by those principles?
Yes. To, to all my knowledge. Mm-hmm.
So, um, from Tim, yeah,
I just wanted to pull out two things.
So let's go reverse order industrial action.
Um, you talked earlier about the, the, the pay
and the conditions and then the
38,000 roughly of allowances.
I think according to the written responses, um, going back
to sort of 21, 22, it was 10.8% of people, of, of, uh,
firefighters career firefighters up to the rank
of senior station officer were,
were earning exceeding 140,000.
This year's response is, that's now up to 52%
or 942 is, is that correct?
I'm just trying to align that with the,
the numbers you gave us earlier.
A second. Sorry. Talk About,
Yeah. So, uh,
we mentioned before you asked about overtime.
So I've done some work on, um,
I call with availability.
So when you look at, uh, our roster, which is a 10 14
for career firefighters, theoretically there's a 184 days,
uh, all shifts that they could fulfill within that period.
Uh, if you take away annual leave, comes down
to about 164 theoretical shifts.
Uh, we've seen a, a decline in availability ratios, um,
which means that they're not available to sit in the seat.
There's a range of things.
There's the, um, public holidays, the holidays act,
there's parental leave, there's sick leave, long service,
et cetera, for training.
A myriad of reasons. You're not sitting in your seat
on a 24 7 roster.
That means we have to backfill that vacancy at double time,
which is the overtime that you refer to, uh,
when you see increases in average earnings, um, of overtime,
it means the availability ratio has dropped.
So our commitment as an organization is let's get that as,
as best as possible.
So are there different ways we could be training people
without having an impact?
Um, are there their wellbeing programs we can put place
to reduce sick leave?
Uh, all of those things.
So if we work on the availability ratio,
it should bring down over time.
And is that, I mean, sick leave gone from 10.4
to 17.8% over five years, that, that doesn't seem
to be happening.
Are you, I mean, actively working on that
Program, I think, do you wanna talk about that program?
Yeah, I mean, the program is an example of that, you know,
where, you know, we've worked, um, collaboratively
with the union to look at, you know,
what are the organizational pressures that are driving that.
Um, but you know, when you, when you talk about the, um,
you know, the, the rises in sick leave, you know,
the combination of, of COVID, um, and the,
and I'm not blaming COVID, um, but no,
Because it has got worse since COVID.
Yeah. So, so I, I think the point, I'm just aware
of the time, but clearly, you know, um,
the figures you show, show, uh,
show a a significant increase in re uh, remuneration
for your staff, which, which is really good
to see typically, if half
of our career firefighters are getting over mm-hmm.
Um, 140,000, that's really encouraging.
But, but, you know, um, clearly there are some things
to look at the, the, but the other half I just wanna get
to was, um, what steps are you taking?
Like I, I see all our fire engines, appliances,
uh, fire stations are covered with union messaging.
Mm-hmm. What steps have you taken to address that?
That can't be what professional starts? Mm-hmm. Yeah,
We've asked the same question, to be fair, you know,
at a board level, and I know the team have looked
into it 'cause it's not something that
The volunteers, so what sticks have you
taken to invest, what have you?
So let me say first that, you know, I respect the, the,
um, the, the, the legal rights
of the professional firefighters union is
to take the strike action that they've got in place.
Um, the, the writing on appliances,
and that is covered by the, by the, um,
the notified strike action.
Um, and the, I've, I've checked that legally to ensure that,
um, there's nothing that we can do in that respect to that.
Um, and that that is the legal right
of the firefighters to do it.
Um, a lot of, um, I know there's a lot of angst from, um,
not just some of the Korea firefighters,
and I'm starting to see across the country, um, some of
that signage and, and riding on trucks
and things no longer being on there.
It's clean trucks now.
Um, but also, you know, I get a lot of,
of feedback from my volunteers just saying, you know,
we need to do something about this.
Um, you know, it's disrespectful. It's not professional.
It's, it's affecting our image.
Um, but it is the, the course of industrial action
that the NZP review has chosen
to take it. And I have to respect
That to us.
And, and, and so effectively you haven't done anything
'cause you believe you can't
Essentially Melissa.
Right. Uh, thank you.
Um, while I was waiting, a lot
of the questions were actually asked, it's in relation to,
um, um, the industrial election.
And the specific thing that I wanted
to talk about was the January 9th, five ang.
Mm-hmm. It's a migrant family who ran a pet shop
who effectively lost their lives.
You know, the whole lives work, you know,
that's fighting from the stories that they would say.
It took 30 minutes
after the call was made at 1207, uh,
for volunteer firefighters
from, I think it was three places.
It was like Cleveland, um, um, like West Auckland
to actually sort of get there.
It took 30 minutes, and I'm guessing by the time the fire,
volunteer fire, uh, fighters actually got there,
it was well ablazed and it was pretty hard to save.
And I noticed that, uh, the professional firefighters
who were actually on strike between 12
and one took four minutes
to actually get there when the
strike was over at one o'clock.
So that means that they could have actually got there at
1111, uh, 1211.
Could that business been saved?
Had the professional firefighters actually decided
to break the, you know, the strike
and actually gone and say that
Before we answer your question directly, I'd just like
to say that, um, myself and Kerry
and Megan have all met with the N-Z-P-F-U
to ask if a situation exactly like that occurred,
would they step in and help.
And we've written to them multiple times,
and I've had, uh, had both verbal
and written response back
to say they know that they wouldn't.
And it's very clear that they wouldn't
'cause they didn't during that timeframe.
But in terms of the operational response,
I'll hand back to Carrie or Megan to answer.
Um, there was a three
or fire station five minutes drive away from that incident.
The impact not only to the livelihood of that whole family,
three brothers owned that business.
Um, the, the stress
that put on our responding senior officers who turned up
to make sure the community was safe and had to stand there
and wait for the response of 30 minutes to come.
I spoke with the, the incident control aid.
It had a huge impact on him, um, seeing
that family's livelihood go.
So the impacts I have been talking
publicly about the risk to community mm-hmm.
Property and life. One
of the brothers was taken to hospital Yes.
Through the stress And heat, serious,
Serious condition to middlemore,
Regardless of the legal right, uh,
around industrial action.
As the leader of operations, I have an obligation to work
with the secretary of the N-Z-P-F-U
to make sure our community is safe no matter
what industrial action's taken, to not be able to sit down
and say, when human life
or property is at risk, these are the conditions
our firefighters can be made
available, I think is unacceptable.
And, and we should, as a senior public servant
and as a leader of a union,
we should put public safety front and center.
And I'm willing to sit down
and make really clear parameters around that.
But, um, as a career firefighter,
to see that have an impact on community is devastating.
And I will do everything in my power to make sure
that doesn't happen no matter what, how long this goes on.
We have to find a solution where community is safe
and trust that will be there for them.
But you, you won't actually have a solution
unless it's actually resolved
because they've said no to going to the fire,
uh, whether life or buildings
or whatever is at risk until this is actually resolved.
And you will be reliant on volunteer firefighters, uh,
who are not nearby, as you said, only five minutes away.
It took four minutes for them
to actually turn up in the end.
Yeah. But it took 30 minutes for volunteer firefighters
who actually, I just wanna say thank you to all
of the volunteer fire fighter fighters
who actually turned up and also professional
firefighters and our senior officer.
'cause you know, I I I think everyone, you know, um,
put their life at stake when they're actually fighting the
fires and actually saving people's lives.
And I appreciate all of them,
but it is utterly frustrating to watch, you know, when
of family's livelihood basically goes up and smoke.
And firefighters who were only five minutes away did
not go to their rate.
We certainly believe that we should be able to, um,
reach an agreement on those situations
with the professional firefighters union.
That should be a position that we can get to.
Like I say, we've reached out three times to,
and we will continue to, to push that.
Um, but, you know, I know other, other, um,
organizations have some restrictions
and the limitations, you know,
we are not seeking legislative change in there.
Um, we believe that we should be able to sit down and,
and have a mutual agreement on what those sort
of situations look like.
And just, just one other point is I think it was really
pleasing to see over the last two weeks
that the New Zealand professional firefighters
lifted the strike action.
Yes. Mon in the Mount Monga. Yeah.
So it shows there's a need there.
So, you know, we are certainly hoping that, um,
the recognition of that need at times will help drive the
conversations between us to actually say, when you have,
when you exercise your industrial action, if there's a
situation that puts people's lives at risk, yeah.
Well then, you know, can we come to some sort
of agreement how that will work?
One of the things that you actually said, Megan,
that a lot of the firefighters,
even though they're actually on strike,
when they see situations like that,
they'll be feeling really, really uncomfortable.
They'll be heartbroken. They'll be heartbroken.
So have you spoken to people who could not turn up to the pa
around fire because of the strike action?
I've got respect that they, um, uh,
taking industrial action.
And it's not for me to try and influence that.
I, I think, um, I can be there as their leader hear
what they have to say, but, um, I've,
I've gotta respect their rights to have representation
and support them in any way I can.
Thank you. We have run out of time now.
Thank you very much for, for being here with us, uh,
today for Thank you.
Thank you much. Thank you. Cheers.
Thanks. Um, we just, um, uh, running a, well,
we're running a bit, um, fine time at the moment,
so we'll get started if you
don't mind when the team's coming in.
Thanks very much for being here, um, with us today.
Uh, and we do have an hour with you,
which will I'm sure go really, really quickly.
So if you wanted to make a few brief opening comments,
and then we'll move to questions from uh,
members over to you.
Uh, thanks very much, uh, and chair.
My name's, uh, Ben King.
I'm the secretary for the Department of the Prime Minister
and Cabinet, and my privilege to appear before you today.
Alongside, uh, members of my executive leadership team,
I have, uh, to my right, Janine Smith,
who's the Deputy Chief Executive
for the Policy Advisory Group and the Delivery Unit.
Um, and there's other umces come forward, I'll ask them
to introduce themselves as necessary.
Um, before I begin, I'd just like to take a moment
to acknowledge the, um, people
who tragically have lost their lives in
last week's weather event.
Um, our heartfelt sympathies with the families, the friends,
and the communities who have been affected as a department,
we are doing everything we can to work across the system
to support a swift response, um,
and to turn, uh, over time to the recovery.
Dpmc is a small agile department
with a broad scope delivering critical functions
to ensure New Zealand remains ambitious,
resilient, and well governed.
2025 has been a year of refocusing
and streamlining the department around its core functions,
and we play a number
of important roles across the public sector.
Firstly, through the Policy Advisory Group
and the National Security and Resilience Group,
we provide free and frank advice to the Prime Minister
and to the Minister for National Security
and Intelligence on the wide range of issues
that require prime ministerial engagement.
We also support effective decision making
and good processes through the cabinet office
and support the Governor General
and government houses in Wellington.
And Auckland department also has responsibilities to lead
and coordinate on national security and resilience.
And these areas are becoming more complex
and more challenging, particularly
as a global political landscape continues to shift.
The liberal rural space order
that has supported the sovereignty, prosperity,
and security of countries like New Zealand over the past 70
years is under increasing strain.
The world becomes less predictable
and stabilizes that we've been able
to rely on are no longer certain.
These realities have significant
implications for New Zealand.
In addition to the global challenges, we're acutely aware
of the risks posed by natural hazards.
As recent events have tragically reminded us.
New Zealand's unique geography makes us particularly
vulnerable, and it's our responsibility
to ensure we are prepared
and resilient in the face of such threats.
We're alert to these challenges
and are taken clear strategic action to deliver,
deliver on our priorities as coordinators
and stewards of the broader system.
Indeed, the government has made resilience a priority
in its approach to funding.
Turning to the year in review, I'd like
to quickly highlight some of our quick key achievements.
These include the coordination of national systems
through significant crises, including the safe release
of a New Zealand citizen held hostage in West Parkour,
the grounding of HMNZ Mani in samo,
and the recent response to the avian influenza outbreak.
Internally, DPMC has undergone significant change
to refocus our core functions.
We've streamlined the department to ensure we are leading
and coordinating across the system,
while also being good stewards
of the funding allocated through the budget process.
The Policy Advisory Group
and delivery unit have also had a productive 2025 supporting
the PM working with central agencies
to drive improvements into public service performance,
and leading on transparent reporting on the delivery
of the government's nine targets
and quarterly action plans
to facilitate effective delivery results for New Zealanders.
Finally, I want to, uh, take the opportunity
to acknowledge the people of DPMC.
Um, their dedication and professionalism, ensure
that we deliver outcomes that matter for New Zealanders,
no matter the challenges we face.
Thanks very much for your time today,
and I look forward to, uh, engaging with the questions.
Thank you. And thank you for acknowledgement
of those effective by the severe aware of weather events.
Um, and that's something the committee is very aware of,
and, uh, thanks for that, uh, acknowledgement.
I'll start with Priyanka and then we'll go to,
Um, thank you for your remarks, Mr. King.
Uh, your forward in the department standing the report, um,
in that you note that you wear a number of different hats,
and one of that of course, is, uh,
the National Security Advisor to the Prime Minister, uh,
and chair of the National Security Board.
And you've alluded to that in your opening remarks as well.
I've got a few questions for you.
Um, wearing that hat, um, at the meeting
of the NSB on the 21st of May, uh, 2025, um,
the board, including yourself unanimously recommended
that the designation of the American Proud Boys, um,
as a terrorist entity be renewed.
Uh, if I understand the process correctly,
the police commissioner Richard Chambers, brought an item to
that meeting, um, requesting that the board recommend
to the Prime Minister that the, um, designation be renewed.
And once this is approved, then it, it is on you
as the chair of the board to take
that recommendation to the Prime Minister. Is this correct?
Uh, that is, that is the process.
Um, as the chair, I also have responsibility
to advise the Prime Minister in my own capacity.
Yeah. Um, so I have the, um, the, um, I guess the agency
to, uh, read the designation Sure.
And make a determination. Yep.
So on the 16th of June, you briefed the Prime Minister,
and, um, your briefing, presumably was
that the designation should be allowed to lapse
or expire, uh, despite the recommendation of both the NSB
and the terrorist Terrorism Designation working group
that it be renewed.
Um, did you, uh, prior to your briefing, um,
to the Prime Minister, did you discuss that with any
minister or any ministerial staff?
No. No.
Why did you not inform
or discuss your decision to advise the PM not to recommend
or renew the designation of the A PB with any other member
of the NSB prior to the 16th June?
So, I, um, the terrorism designations, uh,
incredibly important.
When you're going to take an action to designate a group,
uh, you have to be very clear that you are meeting the legal
and the legislative test.
Mm-hmm. Uh, the process had had, um, run through its course.
It had, as you say, been
through the terrorism designation working group
that had gone to, um,
the National Security Board, which I chair.
Yep. I, um, that evening sat down
and reread the designations for the base
and for the American Proud Boys.
And I was confident that the legislative test
for the base had been met.
But on the American Proud Boys, um,
I was not confident that it had been met.
So I, uh, advised the Prime Minister
that we should let the designation lapse the following day.
I informed, uh, the, uh,
relevant people in the national security, uh, board.
It may not, I mean, as soon as I possibly could, uh,
that I had taken that decision.
We discussed it at the National Security Board at its next
meeting, um, and there was no problem that the decision
that I had taken was, was accepted.
Just a couple of follow up to that then.
You mentioned that you, uh, informed the NSB the next day.
The first indication that I have was an email to you,
to the NSB members on the
24th of June. That's not the next day.
Okay. Well, uh, I, I would have to,
I I will withdraw that and say that.
Yeah. I mean, what I did was I
stepped it through the following day.
I certainly, um, emailed within my group,
within my department mm-hmm.
Uh, the decision and the reasons why.
And it may, uh, have taken some time for us to get
to the NSB, but, um, uh, that was certainly,
uh, put into the system.
I'm sure that my people would've been in touch
with the counterparts as well to let them know
Just to the crux of the matter.
Then you've mentioned, uh, both in writing
and just now that you weren't, um, upon reflection
after it'd been through the full process upon reflection
and rereading the statement of case, which I have here,
you were not, um, convinced that it met
Threshold despite both those others, other groups,
um, recommending that it did.
The statement of case is pretty clear that, um,
that the A PB continues, uh,
its involvement in violent extremism that, uh, they continue
to uphold violence against opponents
as an acceptable solution to solving political disputes.
Uh, a nationally representative survey from just 2022, uh,
identifies that 23% of their supporters said that violence
to stop, uh, those
who do not share my beliefs from voting was justifiable
that 30% thought violence justified
to advance political objective, 20% would be willing to kill
to advance a political objective.
And it concludes by saying that careful analysis of all
of the available information shows
that there are reasonable grounds to believe
that the A PB would've conducted terrorist activity,
were it not for the suppression of the entity's intent
and behavior caused by imprisonment of their leadership.
What in the statement of case did not meet
the threshold in your
View? So,
uh, what I was relying on was section 22
of the Terrorism Suppression Act, which, uh,
requires the Prime Minister to believe on reasonable grounds
that the entity has knowingly carried out
or knowingly participated in the carrying out of one
or more terrorist acts.
And I did not find that that test had been met.
Okay. So my final question to you then, um, is that
despite the fact that the Minister for Police
has stated in written and,
and answers to my written parliamentary questions
that police consider the Pride Boys use crypto fascist
tactics, that there is participation in the A PV here in
New Zealand, and you were aware of both of those points
before you recommended to the Prime Minister
that their designation as a terrorist entity not be renewed?
Yep. So, uh, let me be very clear.
Non designation does not mean we endorse anything
that the American Prayer Boys do.
Their behavior is distasteful.
We do not condone them in their actions in any way.
But my job is to pro ensure
that I provide the Prime Minister with advice consistent
with the law, and I did not consider
that the legislative test of Section 22, it being met.
Thank you. Andy,
I wasn't gonna ask this particular question,
but can I just follow up on that one for you?
Yeah. Okay. So, And that is quick stuff on that one.
So just, and I, this is, this is one outside my area
of knowledge, but just
listening to what you just read about.
So it's, it's, you have
that an entity has already conducted terrorist activity
as opposed to if you think there is good grounds
that an entity is likely to wants to
The Test. So, so
that will fail the test.
The test in section 22 is, I'll, I'll read it, um,
requires the Prime Minister to believe on reasonable grounds
that the entity has either knowingly carried out
or knowingly participated in the carrying
out of one or more terror states. So
If it ha if it intends to but hasn't done it,
it can't be designated according That's
Right. You can't, um,
you can't, um, problematic
someone for a thought. Yeah.
Interesting. Um, Um, so before you go ahead.
So bearing that in mind, in the evidence
provided by, um, our colleague, is that, is
that currently just sort of definition sufficient then
to Yeah, to,
Uh, there is, there is, there is a number,
there is a good amount of work going on across a number
of pieces of legislation,
including this Intelligence Security Act.
Um, we do need
to have another look at the Terrorism Suppression Act.
These are, um, always line calls, which are very difficult.
So I think on the one hand, you're a liberal democracy
and you want people to feel that they can have views
and express them, but on the other hand, you want
to make sure that communities are safe,
you have community orders, um, and you can step in through.
Okay. So pre just,
Just thinking about that, um, given
that our legislation also allows
for activities carried out overseas, was the Jan sixth, um,
attacks, uh,
Capitol Hill riots not considered an act of terrorism then?
Uh, well, it wasn't, um, it wasn't something that,
to my knowledge, it wasn't picked up in the statement
of case and it wasn't considered.
So look, I, I would have to come back to you on that.
I don't, I can't give you a clear answer right now.
But you've also mentioned that this will now go
through a full process.
Uh, again, what was lacking in the process?
My understanding of the process from the terrorism working
the designation group through to the NSB, is the process
that we follow in New Zealand.
Yeah. What if that was not, was lacking
and what will be then in this new process that you have?
Well, there's, it's not a new process.
What we've asked 'em to do is to review the evidence
and check whether or not there is a case for them
to develop a new statement of case and do a determination.
So, um, that'll be up
to the terrorism designation group if they wish to do that.
So the Capitol Hill Rights was mentioned in the first
statement of case, just putting that out there.
What is the timeframe on this new process?
Uh, well, the terrorism designation working group
actively considers all entities.
They would have to decide themselves whether
or not they, they felt there was
sufficient evidence to take it through.
Okay. Thanks, Cindy.
The two areas that I wanted to ask you about, um,
the first one is emergency management.
So you have a coordinating role,
but I wanted to understand how far back
that coordinating role goes.
And I've, I've asked this question of NEMA
and of Minister Mitchell as well.
Um, it's not just picking up the pieces when there's an
event that's happened, and thank you for the acknowledgement
of what's happened, uh, the tragic situation
that's happened over the last, uh, week or so.
Um, but it's trying to make, trying to go back in the system
to try and make sure we've got the infrastructure,
the planning, the land use, all of those sort of things
that we're not putting people
and, um, assets in, in harm's way in the first place.
How far back do you reach into that
and to say, engaging with the likes of the mfe, the likes
of, um, of, of, of nema, the district planning processes,
all of those sort of things to try
and prevent the problems in the first place?
Yeah. Well, we go back, um, if you, if you sort
of thing end-to-end process, probably the, um,
starting point would be the National Risk
and Resilience Framework, uh, which was, um, approved
by cabinet, uh, in December, 2024.
Uh, and that identifies 28 risks.
Uh, and, and a number of those obviously are, are natural,
natural, natural hazards.
Uh, the natural hazards under the new governance
arrangements put in place around
that register are being governed by MFE.
They ultimately report up into the National Resilience
Board, but National Hazards and risks are now managed, um,
or governed by, by MFE with the relevant agencies,
um, doctrine around them.
So they identify the risks.
The, your general risk methodology would be you, um, work
through a maximum credible event,
and then you, uh, look at your resources
and your ability to respond, and you plan around that,
and you, uh, work out where there's a golf, uh, between your
capacity to respond and the maximum credible event.
And then think through how you can, uh, deal with that.
So that's your, that's your, um, policy
and your governance framework, if you
Like. I was trying to get to
the point of,
and I, I, if I take the, what I understand
of the Christchurch read zone as an example of a situation
where planning authorities said, we don't want
to have development there, got overall through the,
through the, um, the, you know, courts process, et cetera,
by developers who did, and hey, priest at some stage later,
um, the, the whole place, um, gets essentially destroyed.
Um, we wanna try and avoid that.
But, so my question really is what do you do?
You've got that framework, it's governed by MFE,
but are we in a situation where there's enough direction to
councils, to government agencies, et cetera, in terms
of implementing that framework?
So as we are not doing future read zones,
future flood zones, I mean, we have the changes
to the Auckland City plans relatively recently to say,
we'll go take 3000 potential homes out of a flood zone.
Makes complete sense not to put 'em there. Yeah.
Uh, we making sure we're trying to do that so we don't
increase the hazard just because we
can manage particular hazard.
'cause it's very expensive and, uh, risk lives as well. Yep.
I, I mean that's, that's really a question for ME we, in,
in the, in the governance framework, we would wanna ensure
that MFE has got their processes,
that they are the lead on this.
Um, it's not so,
But you're the overall governor.
We are the, we're the overall government
of national resilience.
Yes. And so our job is to make sure
that MFE has those processes placed.
So if MFE says they've got
'em, then you're going, it's good.
Well, if MFE said, we're not quite sure Yep.
You, you will get worried and you get engaged.
That's right. Okay. And also, um,
what we are doing this year in the coming years
or this year, is introducing, uh, assurance against risks.
So just because an agency says we've got it,
if they're a strategic coordinating agency, uh,
let's use NPI, which, um, got a high degree of confidence,
and they say, yeah, we are all, we,
we are good for AV and flu.
Mm-hmm. Um, every so often we might just test that
because they do an assurance
check on it to make sure. Sure.
Okay. Look, can I ask one other area of questions,
which is the L lt?
Is that, is this on, um, a different,
different area? Ltps, let's go to Celia,
And then I've got a few on
Resilience, and then we'll come back to you.
I wanna go through ltb. Is that okay? Yeah.
Yeah. Okay. So Celia,
Thank you. Um,
I was just following on from, um, my colleague
I, and again, I thank you
for your expressions of condolence.
Um, we've done that in the house and, um,
but what I'm really interested in is that first R
of the four R's of emergency management reduction risk.
And I'll be interested in, um, obviously you can't, um,
give us your exact words of advice,
but, um, the role that councils play
or should play in production of risk
and how that will be undermined potentially by
rates, cats or the general, um,
expressed views about local government rather often have not
been particularly helpful to, um, local government long-term
planning recently, in my view.
Um, and also the reduction
of science funding generally,
and, you know, geology, geological knowledge
and, um, weather forecasting
and climate assessment are all critical science aspects.
I mean, how do the reductions in those areas
play into our ability, not just to
spot a landslide happening two days before,
but to, you know, prevent all of the waste of human life
and infrastructure?
Yeah. Well, um, questions around, um, I mean, we work
with the funding that the system is given.
Um, ministers make the decisions about
how funds are allocated.
That's our job as public servants to work out how,
how best in the context of the money we are given
or the money that is, um,
provided across the system, how to use that to, um,
and spread it and prioritize it to ensure that we we're, um,
doing the best we possibly can to reduce risk,
to manage risk, to mitigate it.
Um, so in that context, I would, um, say,
uh, that nema, uh,
which is the lead on emergency management, um,
works very closely with councils, as you know, um,
has excellent relationships
and works with local communities, Mariah Iwi, um, as we,
as we sort of stick these things through.
So, um, uh, uh, in the context of the, of the funds we have,
um, which is a, a decision for ministers,
and you could, um, take, take it up with, um,
the lead ministers there on, on that question.
Um, our job is to do the best we can.
I'm really pretty confident, um, that we are doing as well
as we can, given what we have.
Thanks. Um, I mean,
this is obviously quite a significant change since the last
time we were looking at the annual review.
Yes. In terms of the, um, movement of nema.
Um, where did that decision come from in terms of
what was the decision making that led to
that agency moving out?
And the reason I'm asking you question is not just
to find out the details, but obviously there is a
significant alignment between the resilience work
that you do in emergency management.
So could you explain how that came about? Sure.
I mean, you could, you could put Mima in a number
of places, uh, and it would make sense.
Um, so, uh, if you think of it as aligned alongside defense
now under DIA, uh,
and, uh, working closely with the local government functions
and the, um, civil defense
and those sorts of functions
that sit under the de Department of Internal Affairs,
the alignment there, um, is very strong on delivery
and actual, um, uh, function.
So, um, we, we were, we went through a policy process
and, um, and, uh, determined that NMA would be best placed,
um, in DIA, where it, where it had initially come from.
So, so it came through, uh, policy advice from from DPMC?
Yes. Yes. Um, in 2024, the, uh,
auditor General said that New Zealand was not ready
for another major event.
Do you consider that New Zealanders now ready for, um,
any major events in terms
of your role in resilience and disaster
Resilience? I think, um,
what I can say is we are better placed, uh,
and we are seeping up.
I think, uh, when I appeared for you, um, last year,
I think I said to you that, um, I considered our
resourcing on resilience as opposed
to national security was underdone.
Mm-hmm. Um, and we've actually shifted a lot of resource,
um, in our recent, uh, restructure and realignment.
So, uh, this time last year,
I had three people working on risk and resilience.
I now have 13. Um, so,
and there was actually three working on,
on resilience, and I've now got eight.
So risk and resilience is 13.
So it's a significant realignment of our resource.
Um, they drive the work on the National Risk
and Resilience Framework.
They will, um, help govern the, uh,
national Resilience Board and,
and, um, we've got some really great new people from across
the system working in that area.
And I'm, I'm very confident in saying we are better placed,
uh, and that we'll continue to build our capability
as we run that, um, resource to, to, to,
um, to be
A significant, um, piece of work
that this committee will be undertaking will be the, uh,
bill into emergency management.
Yes. The number two bill that we'll be looking at, uh,
obviously that, um, our objective will be the same to try
and deliver a system which is, uh, resilient and,
and meets the needs of New Zealand's very, uh, high risk,
um, profile for these types of, um,
emergencies and disasters.
In terms of DPM C'S resilience role, how will you be, uh,
ensuring that, that we as a committee
and indeed parliament passes, uh, a piece
of legislation which is most likely to result in a,
in a more resilient New Zealand? Yep.
So I mean, we've had, um,
extensive engagement in the ledge.
Um, so through, uh, our policy responsibility through the,
um, uh, what was, um, uh, the, um,
STR strategy and risk group, uh, before the restructure, um,
and, um, uh, also through the National Hazards Board.
So there's been sort of, DPMC has had its own line in, um,
but we've also brought the system to be,
we've had two meetings, uh, on the EM bill.
Um, so we, we feel we've had a lot of input.
We've been able to provide policy advice
through the cabinet process and those sorts of things.
So the bill is, is
before you, um, is, is, uh, fit the purpose.
Um, obviously the, um, the select committee process
and everything else that, that will roll through, um, is,
is essential because we know that builds better legislation
as you talk to stakeholders.
Um, but we, um, I'm confident that the, the process, um,
you know, the, the bill before you
and then your work as a committee, uh, will,
will lead to a good bill.
So just fi just finally to kind of wrap up my, um,
questions on, on the resilience side, um, the, uh,
1, 1, 1 system, um, is an integral way that New Zealand, uh,
utilizes emergency management within New Zealand, um,
in emergency situations, is your view.
And it's hard to find exactly who's responsible for this.
'cause there's so many different organizations,
and I know police have a role in things as well.
But in your view, is that, um, fit for purpose
at this stage in terms of, um, allowing New Zealanders
who increasingly use mobile devices, um, to be able
to access emergency services?
That's not an issue I've given, uh, much thought to,
but I would be happy if it's all right with you to come back
to you with a written response.
Yeah, I, I think it will. I mean, it's really, it's meant
to be a, a, an answer
to prompt looking at making sure the system as a,
as a whole is as for purpose.
This, um, so we do have a few, um,
subs on, did you have a sub on list too?
Yes, the, yeah, so I'll go to, I'll go
to Andy and then, yeah.
So, so just you, you said in the, the, that the bill,
you're confident that it's fit for purpose?
Question I ask, I mean, I've gotta go back
and reread the bill again, but it did seem very much about
the structure of emergency management
and rather than about other, the sort of wider things.
I mean, you know, things, there's no mention things,
oh 1, 1 1, I'm not suggesting there should have been,
but necessarily there's a whole lot of other things that go
to emergency preparedness and it,
and the systems that operate around it,
and what happens if there isn't, and
what's the support that goes in there.
You know, I'm looking at, I, you know, engaging with the,
for example, some of the communities around the East coast
and, um, you know, there's a lot of stuff that they,
that none of that's gonna be referenced in there at all.
And we don't get lots of emergency management bills.
And my question is, what is the purpose of that bill
and what is not the purpose of that bill, which is outside
of it, which is absolutely relevant
to emergency management terms by the prevention
or responsible recovery?
Well, I guess, I guess, um, black law,
black letter law, I guess the law that you pass
and the, the bill that you consider will, uh,
should set the framework and the parameters
and provide the, um, permissions for the various agencies,
what they can and can't do.
I mean, that's to, to me, what a good
emergency management bill will do.
And then there'll be a whole lot of stuff underneath that.
Regulation policy, policy statements,
ministerial policy statements, funding decisions, uh,
the community engagement, which flash out the bill.
But I think, um, if you freight too much into the bill,
the risk would be from my perspective.
No, I understand that. But the permissions
and the expectations of other agencies,
which are covered elsewhere, at least if
that's properly covered, I think that would be helpful.
And that's the question, I suppose, is, is it at the moment?
Well, I think the bill before you is, um, we, we,
it's had a lot of it, a lot of engagement across the system.
Yeah. And, and agencies are happy with, uh, you know, we,
we've put forward a bill that we think is very worthy
of parliamentary consideration.
Um, we'll go through your examination process
and it come out better, bill. Yeah.
Yeah. Well, I sort, I think we're being encouraged to do
that, so from multiple directions, so that's good.
Um, can you, funnily just, can you tell us the, the range
of the agencies which have been involved in that kind of,
uh, just gives a bit of a feel for who they might
Sure. I mean, um,
this would be a, I'll come back to you,
but a non-exhaustive list if I just off the top
of my head sort of things.
Um, the National Hazards Commission, um, D-P-M-C-N-P-I, MB
Treasury, um, ministry, foreign Affairs and Trade Health.
So it, it is a, it's a very, so you've got,
you've got organizations like health, welfare, um,
tourism, all those sort of agencies.
Well, okay. That, that's helpful, Vicky.
Yeah. I just wanna, while we focus on resilience, just ask
how your department is positioned to help,
uh, New Zealand, both in terms of the people, Kiwis,
new Zealanders, uh,
and New Zealand as a country in terms of the social
and community and government infrastructure,
and the face of the risks and challenges that we face.
But, but can I just start by asking, like,
I think there's a naturally, at the moment,
a heightened awareness of the natural hazards we face,
and that will be dealt with through this legislation
and when we actually, you know, when we have NMA before us,
but can you tell us what the department, what are the risks
that the department deals with now that NMA has moved out?
And, and what are the risks that Kiwi should be sort
of aware of that are what,
what threatens Kiwis at the moment?
Sure. Um, good question.
So what don't I start with your second part
and work back towards, uh, the national hazard.
So if we, if we, um, if we think about the things
outside the national and the natural hazards that, uh, um,
for or at the forefront, if you like, of, um,
the National Security Board's consideration
and the department's consideration.
Um, quite high on the list.
Um, very high on the list. I put
transnational serious organized crime.
Mm-hmm. I think it's a, um, it's a, uh, a,
a real threat to our democratic institutions.
Yeah. The way that these effectively business organizations,
um, run, um, uh, illicit product, uh,
drugs, um, counterfeit cigarettes, uh,
anything they can make it back off, um,
run it into our system
and, uh, look for ways to pervert our rules, uh, look
for ways to, um, disrupt our processes
and ultimately look also for ways, uh,
they can put pressure on individuals in the system to try
and get outcomes that are beneficial to them.
Mm-hmm. Um, these are serious threats.
We are certainly not alone as a country
and facing these, um, most other countries, um,
liberal democracies would face the same threats.
And, uh, they are very real.
And we spend a lot of time as a system thinking about
what are the risks and how can we, um, use our resource
to respond to them
and be aware of the, um, various threads
that run through there.
Um, and that's a great example of how as a system
we are able to work together because it, it covers customs
and be police intelligence agencies, DPMC, ministry affairs,
trade, you sort of think about, um, transport.
Um, there's, there's barely an agency, um, that,
that is outward facing, that is not, um, actively working
and thinking and coordinating on this issue.
Um, foreign interference remains a, a real, um, uh,
uh, threat to our system.
And, um, we should be aware of that particularly, uh,
impacts on, um, on our ethnic communities.
Uh, cyber, um, as we see with manage my health, um, is, is,
um, a real issue.
Um, and it's something that the private sector, individuals
and government need to, um, continue to invest in
and, uh, be prepared for.
Um, emerging tech, I think continues to, uh, challenge, uh,
provide a challenge to the system.
Um, uh, developments in AI are a great opportunity.
Uh, they also present risk.
We shouldn't overstate the risk,
but they do, uh, quantum, uh, all those sorts of, um,
new new tech and emerging tech issues, uh, uh, challenging
for us as a country and us as a system.
Mm-hmm. Uh, the, um, tragic events in Bondi
towards the end of last year, uh, uh, also indicate that,
um, terrorism globally is, uh, continues to be a,
a real, um, threat.
And one, a risk to be, um, actively managed
the environment internationally is, is, um, degrading.
Uh, and in New Zealand, that's where things are, um, stable,
but we should not be complacent.
And, um, actually one of the
early items on the National Security Board who are coming
a couple of months is a deep dive on our CT capability, just
to check as a system, again, sort of that assurance role.
What do we have, do we have the
right resource in the right place?
Are we, we properly coordinated, um, to,
to deal with those issues.
If I step back into your, the first part
of your question about, um, how, how are we positioned to,
um, support New Zealanders, um, in the face
of the natural hazards and the risks?
Um, again, as I, um, said, uh, to the chair, um,
we feel we are, we are better placed
and we've got a good program in place to continue
to build our, um, preparedness and our resilience.
So again, the National Risk
and Resilience Framework is a big step forward.
Um, it's a sort of 28 national risks there, um, published,
uh, publicly, people are aware of them.
Uh, we, um,
we have an annual check-in against each of the risks.
And all of those risks have now, uh,
after a cabinet decision in September, all
of them have a strategic coordinating agency.
So there's a lead agency, which is against each risk.
They're responsible for the management of it.
Um, they report in
through either the National Emergency Management Board, uh,
the, um, natural Hazards Board, which is run by mfe
or the National Security Board, which DPMC chairs.
And ultimately they go up to the National Resilience Board.
So that's, uh, we feel that the, um, system is, uh,
much better placed and the governance arrangements are tidy.
Um, we have the National Security Strategy, which again,
um, identifies all the risks.
It's a good conversation with, uh,
drives conversations with communities.
And that's really important.
So when, again, when I think about counter-terrorism
and now how we, um, address that 10 years ago,
uh, conversations about terrorism with, with communities,
um, nowhere near what they are now.
Mm, active management, active conversations,
open discussions, uh, about active risks, how we
as communities and how they
as communities can help the system, uh, to, to,
to manage the system so that community engagement has become
a really important tool.
Yeah. And can you, sorry, that,
and that was the bit, like,
can you expand on what that looks like?
Like, like we say, it's better than it was 10 years ago,
but can you sort of just give us a tangible example
that people will relate to?
Sure. Um, well, I know that my, um, uh,
national security team and, uh, and police, uh,
and the intelligence agencies,
I know they're doing the same thing,
but I'll just talk about what we do.
Um, we certainly have active engagement with,
with the Jewish community, with, um, the C community as sort
of as, as we just go through,
Targeted not more broad community discussions,
No target. Well,
no, we do have broader community discussions as well.
So the counter terrorism strategy
or the new strategy, which was put up online in December,
that's the sort of, um, run, hide, tell, um, uh, situation.
So, so we, we are building broader community awareness
and, and engagement as well.
But that sort of, um, bespoke targeted engagement.
So one, um, one example I could give you is myself,
uh, Richard Chambers
and, uh, Andrew Hampton from the SIS, uh, spent, um,
a few hours on a Saturday with, uh, IANS with the, uh,
group, which was sort of there to look back on the events
of Christchurch, but also look forward
and just think about how we're going.
So really open engagement.
We sort of gave presentations
and then took questions for about two or three hours.
Um, very good, rich discussion.
Um, and it's really interesting that, um,
the comments I was making to you about, um, that line
between, you know, a free and open society
and protecting communities is, is something that
we always need to challenge
and be very, very thoughtful about it, I think in, in, yeah,
it's, um, it's something that we, we need
to constantly wrestle with,
but it is, you know, what measures do you put in place
to keep a community safe, um, as a, as a society?
And, and where do the,
where do the individual freedoms come?
So, as an example, um,
because someone holds a religious
or an ideological belief, it shouldn't mean that they come
to the attention of the intelligence agencies.
They'd have to, you know, have to do something
or have some intent.
A belief is, is not in, in
and of itself sufficient in my view.
So it's that, it is just that constant line
and talk that through with
communities can be really helpful.
Provide a lot of reassurance.
Uh, Melissa, you had a supplementary Yeah,
I was, um, it's in the same line.
Uh, I guess you talked about your engagement with fiance.
I was wondering how you were actually communicating
your work so that the communities are more aware.
I mean, fiance is only one group,
but there is specific issues you have with things like,
as you mentioned, foreign interference
with the cyber security incursions.
You've got a whole lot of of risk that, you know,
New Zealand as a country is actually facing,
but often the work that you do
or the government actually does,
is not communicated very well that people don't understand,
especially in the migrant community whose English language
skills are actually, uh, limited often.
Yeah,
Yeah. Um,
that, that's a good point.
So if we take foreign interference in cyber, um, as example,
so we, we try, we basically try
and do your, um, broadcast, um, uh,
engagement if you like,
which is making information available on websites,
making sure it's accessible, where it's,
where necessary make, you know,
it's accessible in
foreign languages and those sorts of things.
So, so that's just sort of your, your,
your broad brush engagement if you like.
But that's more making information available.
But then we do try and target, um, organizations
and groups that, uh, relevant
or, uh, under pressure or a risk.
Uh, so on foreign interference,
we have a very broad program work there, which, um, talks
to business, talks to local government.
We talk to, uh, ethnic communities,
minority communities from migrant communities.
We talk to, um, iwi.
So a number of, um, you know, targeted outreach,
uh, um, trusting, trusting
and trusted conversations about what we are seeing
and what what they're seeing and sharing perspectives
and providing support where we can on cybersecurity.
Uh, obviously, um, we have very targeted engagement with,
um, particularly the national
critical infrastructure providers.
Uh, so we do that often in comment, coordination
with the intelligence agencies that's just making sure
that they're, uh, so the banks, the power companies,
the telcos, they're aware of the re the risks, they're aware
of the threats and that they know that what, what we can do
to support them and also what to do in the event of a,
of a, a cyber attack.
So it is, it's sort of, I mean, it, it's, it's impossible
to get right, but we, we try
and, um, use target engagement where we can.
Thank you, Andy. Yeah.
Look, the other area I wanted to, um, uh,
to pursue was LTBs.
Yes. Um, because you've made some, um, quite, um,
useful comments about LTBs.
Um, just can you two, first thing is,
can you just give us your view of the value of those
LTBs at the moment, uh, under the structure as we've got 'em
Now? Yeah. So under
the structure, we've got them, um,
I'll take a step back from, or say it's important
and it's incumbent on public service agencies if they're
doing their job properly, to think short term
and provide policy advice on the issues
of the data ministers, but also to think long term,
that's your stewardship responsibility.
Um, and we and the system take that seriously.
Um, the system as we currently have is,
um, very prescriptive.
It's, um, it requires each agency to do an,
it requires two levels of engagement.
It requires, um, quite a lot of engagement.
And our department view is that we're, um, confident
that, uh, a shift to, uh, all
of system long-term insights briefing, which is
how the Australian steward, um, uh, would be,
uh, very useful.
It'll provide a whole of system view,
and it will, um, take a lot of the impost
of the current system, uh, outing.
So, so we, we, we think the, um, proposed changes are, uh,
um, are net positive in terms of, um, impost on the system.
So, so thank you for that. So,
because of course then you become the coordinating agencies.
Um, so you, can you just walk us through
what the process will be in terms
of you making sure you've got the,
The, The perspectives of all those agencies
that could contribute to that whole set stuff,
and then also able to articulate it
because I mean, you know, reading LTBs, um, to date,
I've found 'em all very, very useful.
Some of 'em are slightly more transactional, some of 'em,
but they give you a, you know, really good big picture of
Yeah. Where, where an
agency is seeing things going.
So how do we don't lose that, um,
from any individual part of the
Yep. So,
so one, um,
one way that that could be, uh, uh, encouraged would be for,
um, parliamentary examination of agencies to ask them
what they are doing in terms of long-term thinking.
So this is outside of the alter process,
but I know health has a horizons function.
A lot of agencies have embedded in their system
and a long-term insights function, uh,
and, um, they will continue to produce work
and put, put, put, um, put product out.
In terms of, um, the TTA itself, uh, we, there is a lot
of engagement between, uh, public service chief executives
and public service agencies.
So, uh, we, we, as chief executives, we meet fortnightly,
we've got a very good rhythm of consultation
and engagement and discussion.
We have, um, three retreats a year, um, as, uh,
as a public service agency, Jan as, and,
and then Janine, uh, runs, for example, process for dcs,
um, on the policy side.
So we've got a range of engagement
and ways of reaching in, we'll come up
with a system, but, um,
but we, we have given thought to how we would do this.
I mean, the obvious thing, uh, to do would be
to convene in one of your, one
of our fortnightly meetings would be
to start some brainstorming about the sorts of issues
that we use a system as a public service.
So it's not gonna be DP C sitting in a room in a dark
room with the word process. Well,
I was hoping, I'm sure it wasn't gonna be
Ask gt, uh,
what a good topic we, you think it'll be system wide.
We thinking, what are the issues of the day?
What do we want to elevate, what do we want to privilege
and amplify and put forward
as highly long term thinking Yeah.
To, you know, provoke the system to,
to think about the issues that matter.
So, um, is how the Australian system does it,
we don't always follow the Australians,
but we have looked at, um, uh, how, how good it is there.
They coordinate a very good system, uh, process
and we'd look to emulate something like this. Right.
Okay. So a couple of things just to add to that.
Um, you'll be aware as obviously the committee
who were shepherding a lot
of those long term insights briefings
through in the first round, we went
through a review exercise
and worked through what worked, what didn't within
that first exercise.
So we'll be taking a lot of learnings out of that process
as well, uh, through the policy project,
what sits within the policy advisory group.
We also have a really strong cohort
of the strategic policy teams across the various agencies.
And what we learned from the first time round was very much
that we need to bring those agencies together
and share, for example, the underlying data
and assumptions that sit underneath a lot of
what the topics were at the time.
So we took a lot of action off the back of that,
and we would see that continuing in terms of the ability
to be able to bring and share some of that information.
For example, we had, uh, the climate scientists from, uh,
come together with our, our chief economists together with,
uh, statistics New Zealand,
talking about the demographics across New Zealand.
So we do have a, a standing cohort
that we're able to utilize.
We plan to use that as we move into, if that gets passed
through the parliamentary process.
So as Ben said, we're not,
we're not operating from a standing start.
Good, good. That's, that's very encouraging.
So, fi final question in that area is just so
is the potential within that for contest of ideas as well
and for those contests to be, um, expressed as contest
as opposed to you, you synthesize them all,
you massage them all within the, the, the collection of, uh,
of chief executives, et cetera, and, and your own process
and parliament gets say of you,
which everybody's all massaged, worked it out, as opposed
to saying, actually we think the answer belongs there.
We think the answer
belongs there and there's actually contest.
And because that's,
that's very valuable to get that as well.
If there, if there are, well, um, will be some,
I wouldn't see our department
as super intending the product.
Uh, we won't always lead it. Mm-hmm.
Our goal will be to decide what the topic is
to make sure it sort of gets done on time
and on, on, on, on, um, topics On budget.
Yeah. Um, or topics.
Um, the, um,
there is always a very healthy contest of ideas,
the development policy advice,
and long term insights briefing.
Um, so I've been involved in a few, um, o over my career.
Um, and the contest of ideas is, is useful.
What the public service does try to do though, is to come
to a, a position
because it's not helpful usually to, um, to ministers
or to, um, to the public for them, for you, for you
to come up and just say, well, here's,
here's seven different ideas,
and these are the, these are the range of things.
So, well, you, you can integrate the advice, you can talk it
through, you can, you can talk it through in that way,
but that's not generally
what a long-term insights briefing would be
unless you just wanna identify the range of use.
But I think actually that it's not,
this is not a controlling mechanism.
It's a, it's a, the, the,
the policy process in the long-term insights processes,
you try and, uh, surface all the issues.
Yeah. You give an account of them
and then you sort of say, well,
and we think that these are the, these are the go forwards
or these are the, these are the
ways that you can address them. Well, perhaps
How could put it this way, for example, you might have,
I mean, you're thinking about long term insights
and where you think the future might go.
You might have, well, we think
that the future could look like this,
but on the other hand, it could look like this.
Yep. And I think it's, it's very valuable
because if it's only this only one scenario, you kind
of lead decision makers down that one path.
And that might not actually be the path.
One thing we do know about the future
is that we won't get it. Right. That's
Right. We, we
Don't know what the future's gonna be. So
it's actually, it's actually healthy to have that variety
of possible thoughts about what it's there.
Think, well, not expressing
that would be concern of bring it all together.
Let me give you an assurance that the,
the process is not about managing a vanilla outcome.
It's about letting the the process wrong. Its course.
Um, some briefings may be as simple
as actually identifying the seven different
scenarios and thinking about how you
Well, we're only gonna get one briefing now.
One briefing. We might, we might need to leave the long.
Right. Okay. Thank you. Thank you
Elia. And then we'll go to Priyanka.
Thank you chair.
And um, I do really find, um,
those questions very interesting.
I'm really pleased that we do have
the long term site briefing,
even if the change in their process.
Um, my question was about accessibility
and in particular I asked about, um, how DPMC
was, um, reacting to their position
on the, what call the agency leaderboard
for web accessibility.
And I asked whether, um, DPMC was aware of their position,
and I got really pointed back to your existing answer,
question 22, which is a fairly odine.
Um, we are trying to be accessible.
We are aware of the, um,
centralized web accessibility checker.
Um, but you know, NEMA is doing really well.
They've got a score of two, a low score is good.
Um, you are doing one better than treasury.
You'll be pleased to know DPMC
and a lot better than, um, the Crown Law office.
But I don't think 74 is great.
Um, what do you think would be a reasonable sort of place
to arrive at and when are you going to get there?
So how about, um,
I take that question as a provocation to look at it closely
and come back to you with, um, an answer.
It's not something I've given any detail engagement into in
preparation, but I am happy to take it on board
And look at it. You're such an,
in more detail, such an important agency
for people to be able to find out information on that.
Um, I would really like, I mean, I'm not expecting you
to get to zero tomorrow.
We had, we had family violence
and sexual violence executive board relatively new.
They've got zero, but there're they're newer
and they're more focused.
So I I was not saying you have to get
to zero by this time next
Time. No, no. Well, look, it's something
I'll, I'll, um,
I'll take that on board.
I will be some work. Um,
Hi, So sorry.
So, um, I'm Alan Cassidy.
I'm the Deputy Chief Executive of Charge of Corporate.
So comms fits under my, um, area.
We are aware of where we sit on the lead board.
So I think it's 27 out of 373 in terms of,
um, uh, accessibility.
Um, I suppose the short answer is no, we're not happy with
that and that will need to be a focus, um,
for us going forward.
Um, we've just come off a significant, um,
change program including actually reestablishing, um,
comms functions, um, corporate infrastructure.
So, um, it will be something that we need to take away.
We are conscious, we need
to make improvements, and they're very
Yes, that would, that would be, that would be useful.
And I'm not really
so interested in the relative positions I everyone to move moving.
Yeah. But it, it's also,
It's In a bit of competitions, no bad things.
No. And it is an indication
that we have work to do in that.
Thank you. Thank You, Priyanka. Thank you.
Um, Mr. King, I've just been mulling over a couple
of comments that you've made in response to,
I think it was Tim Coley's question.
You mentioned that when it comes to terrorism,
just holding an ideological belief is not enough.
You need to have done something
or have the intent to do something.
Plus the definition, um, of terrorism in the TSA, uh,
makes no mention of it having to be in New Zealand.
That in addition to section 24 of the act
where it clearly states that an entity that can be design,
uh, may be designated, even if it is not in New Zealand,
um, that also coupled with your own outcome three, which is
that people living in New Zealand should be able to be safe
and to feel resilient, safe and secure,
and particularly that diverse communities should be able
to have confidence in the national security system.
So bearing all of that in mind, plus the fact
that on page four of your 2025 statement
of case there are at least eight separate incidents
that I can count of actual violence perpetrated
by this group, um, in the us.
Um, can I ask whether you consulted with Crown Law
before you changed or before you
provided the briefing to the pm which kind
of flew in the face of all of the decisions
or recommendations by both the terrorism designation working
group and the NS?
Uh, no, I didn't. I I've, I've
provided that in, um, answers
to written parliamentary questions that,
that I didn't consult. Craig,
Why is that? Are you a lawyer?
Uh, no, I'm not a lawyer, but I can actually, uh, make I,
over the course of my career
and my, um, extensive, uh, experience in working
through these issues, um, I am able to make,
and I'm required to make judgements
and I made a judgment, which I stand by
and which I have taken back to the National Security Board
and it's been endorsed.
So I I, it, it's, I, I haven't made this
by myself, I've taken it back.
I've talked through my decision with the terrorist,
with the National Security Board.
All of the, um, members
of the tourism designation were border on that, uh,
and they were, um, comfortable with my decision.
When the police commissioner asked you
for a call on the 23rd of June, what did he ask you about
with regard to your recommendation? Uh, to the pm?
So I don't have an exact recollection of that,
but I know that we discussed the, um,
we discussed my decision
and he was comfortable with my explanation.
So just to, just to end, so,
so you are telling the committee that
although there have been multiple cases
of actual violence perpetrated by the A PB in the us,
the fact that the New Zealand police considers them a crypto
fascist group and
that they do have membership in New Zealand, that diverse,
and they target specific communities,
particularly the L-G-B-T-Q-I community, you are saying
that diverse communities should still have confidence in the
system and the PMs to decision
and feel safe with this group not having
their designation reviewed.
So that's a different question to the question
that I'm required to consider by law, which is whether
or not the test of section 22 is met.
That was, that was, that was the test I had to make
and I I did not consider it was met
Despite eight, at least
eight incidents of violence. Well,
It's a question of whether or not they
are terrorist acts or not.
And that's again, as a, as a, as a question.
So, um, I'm happy to, to go through it again
with you in more detail, but, but it's,
it's a judgment I made, I took it back
to the National Security Board
and the National Security Board endorsed
decision. I'll take you up on
That. Thank
You.
Uh, J just to be really clear,
'cause it, I think maybe I understood
what you said first different to
how others are based on the questions.
Is the, is the requirement under the ACT, section 22,
is the threshold about violence or is it about
Terrorism? Terrorism, a
terrorist act?
Right? So for example,
is would Hamas be designated a terrorist group?
Yes. And therefore, if you were to recognize Hamas as a,
as a legitimate government of Palestine, would
that be acceptable? Wow.
Well, that's a different question. Again,
It's probably not Terrorism DMCs role,
and it's probably more a question for my colleague B Co.
Yeah. But, um, but I, I, I, again,
I think it's really important that, um, we consider
what each process is for
and what question you're asking the decision maker to, um,
to, to determine
Case terrorism Not violent.
In the case that I was, um, in front of me is whether
or not, uh, terrorist acts have been committed.
Right. I have a question about a different area. Yes.
Um, and you have reporting outcomes, uh, in DPMC
and one of those reporting outcomes is New Zealand system
and institutions of executive government are trusted,
effective, um, and enhance our nation's interests.
Uh, we're looking at the previous reports, uh, into,
uh, the work that DPMC has done on this.
And I think in, um, 20 22, 23, I think, uh,
the auditor to general was informed
that it was under development and also in 23, 24.
And I think this year, um, I understand
that no information has been
provided in relation to community engagement
that builds trust and confidence in government.
And I just wanted to ask you, is that
because, uh, DPMC is no longer going to be working in
that area, or what is, what is,
what message can we take from, from the fact
that no information was provided on that?
Uh, let me come back to you on that.
My, I'll, I'll check this
and confirm it with you in a follow up, um, uh, statement,
but my, uh, my, um, understanding is that is
because we've shifted our, um,
our surveys from an annual to a bi-annual basis.
So it's your understanding that that's still, um, part
of DMC's work? Yes.
Well, engagement, I mean the performance measures, um,
we have, we have changed quite a few of them
because, um, we, we didn't think they were fit for purpose.
We are redoing our strategic intentions, uh,
in the next couple of months that will give us new outcomes
and, and will put new performance measures against those.
So, but our community engagement very
much is central to our web.
That's, that's great. Thank you.
Um, we're almost out of time,
but I just, um, had a few questions that I didn't get time
to answer and I might have to put some of them in,
in written questions,
but just in terms of the, the actual doing,
um, oh, sorry.
Actually the, the main thing that I forgot
to ans ask in relation to resilience is in budget 23,
there was 6 billion for a national resilience plan.
Um, and that was in response to the weather events and, um,
and allocated 2.6 million at that time.
And I'm just wanting to check with you
that this is your understanding that's correct,
that in budget 24, the balance of
that 3.2 million was returned to the center.
Is that your understanding?
Um, I, I'd have to check that and come back to you.
Okay, that's great. Um, I think we can probably, um, wait
to hear back from you on, on some of those issues.
Great. Well, we're out of time now, so thank you very much
us today, and, um, it was, uh, good to engage with you
and we look forward to hearing the responses to some
of those outstanding questions.
Thanks very much.